# Punjab Municipal <b>Act</b>, 1911
# Source: Indian Kanoon, doc_id=183213050
# Fetch query: Indian Contract Act Section 10 agreements contracts free consent

Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 PUNJAB India Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 Act 3 of 1911 Published on 11 August 1911 Commenced on 11 August 1911 [This is the version of this document from 11 August 1911.] [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.] Punjab Municipal Act, 1911(Punjab Act No. 3 of 1911)Last Updated 24th January, 2020[Dated 11.8.1911]Received the assent of the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab on the 3rd May, 1911, and that of the Governor-General on the 7th July, 1911, and was first published in the Punjab Gazette of the 11th August, 1911.An Act to make better provision for the Administration of Municipalities in [Punjab] [Substituted for the words ' East Punjab' (which had been inserted for the word 'Punjab' by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Bengal and Punjab Acts) Order of 1948 by the Adaptation of Laws (Third Amendment) Order, 1951.].Whereas it is expedient to make better provision for the administration of municipalities in Punjab. It is hereby enacted as follows : -Chapter IPreliminary 1. Title, extent and commencement. (1)This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.(2)It extends only to the territories [***] [Words 'for the time being' omitted vide Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order 1937.] administered by the [Government] [Substituted for the word 'Lieutenant- Governor' by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] of [Punjab] [Substituted for 'East Punjab' by Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] and(3)It shall come into force on [such day as the [State] [This Act came into force on 1st October, 1911, see Punjab Gazette, 1911, Part I, page 527.] Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.]2. Repeal. (1)The enactments mentioned in the Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof.(2)Saving Clause. - But all municipalities constituted, committees established, limits defined, appointments, rules, regulations, bye-laws and orders made, notifications and notices issued, taxes, tolls, rates and fees imposed or assessed, contracts entered into, and suits instituted under the said Acts, or any enactment thereby repealed, shall, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively constituted, established, defined, made, issued, imposed or assessed, entered into and instituted under this Act.3. Definitions. - In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context. -(1)[ "annual value" means - [Substituted by Punjab Amending Act 11 of 1994.](a)in the case of land or building which is in the occupation of a tenant, the gross annual rent at which the land or building has actually been let:Provided that in the event of increase in the rent, the Committee may make corresponding increase in the annual value :Provided further that where the land or building has been let by the owner to any of his relations, and the Committee is of the opinion that the rent fixed does not represent the true rent, the rent fixed under the agreement of lease shall not be taken into consideration and the annual value shall be determined in accordance with the principles contained in clause (b);(b)in the case of land or building which is occupied by the owner, the annual value shall be five per cent on the sum obtained by adding the present market value of the land and estimated cost of erecting the building less ten per cent depreciation :Provided that in the calculation of annual value of any land and building, no account shall be taken of the furniture or machinery thereon ;(c)in the case of any land on which no building has been erected but on which a building can be erected, and on any land on which a building is in the process of erection, the annual value shall be fixed at five per cent of the estimated market value of such land ;(d)in the case of any land on which no building has been erected but on which a building can be erected, or which is partially built and is being used by erecting tents, temporary structures for the purpose of accommodating marriage parties, circus shows or for any entertainment purposes or such other purpose as may be specified in this behalf by the Committee with the previous sanction of the State government the annual value shall be twenty per cent of the estimated market value of such land;](2)[ "building" means any shop, house, hut, outhouse, stable, a fAct No.ory, an industrial shed and a temporary structure erected by means of tents and structures raised for entertainment purposes whether roofed or not and whether used for the purposes of human habitation or otherwise and whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, thatched, metal or any other material whatever, and includes a wall and a well;] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994.](3)"bye-laws" and "bye-law" means respectively the regulations made or to be made by the committee at a special meeting under the authority of this Act and any of such regulations.(4)"committee" means a Municipal Council or a Nagar Panchayat, as the case may be, constituted under section 12 of this Act;(4a)[] [Old (4a) omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994 and old 4(b) renumbered as 4a.] "Deputy Commissioner" or "Deputy Commissioner of the District" includes Additional Deputy Commissioner, Joint Deputy Commissioner or any person or persons at any time appointed by the State Government to perform in any district or districts the functions of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act:(4b)[] [Old 4a omitted by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994 and old 4b renumbered as 4a.] "District Planning Committee" means a Committee constituted under Article 243 ZD of the Constitution of India;(4c)" election" means and includes the entire election process commencing on and from the date of notification calling for such election of members and ending with the date of declaration and notification of results thereof;Provided that no official shall be so appointed unless he has for three years exercised the powers of a magistrate of the first class.(5)"erect or re-erect any building" includes -(a)any material alteration or enlargement of any building,(b)the conversion by structural alteration into a place for human habitation of any building not originally constructed for human habitation,(c)the conversion into more than one place for human habitation of a building originally constructed as one such place,(d)the conversion of two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of such places,(e)such alterations of a building as effect an alteration of its drainage or sanitary arrangement, or materially affect its security,(f)the addition of any rooms, buildings, out-houses or other structures to any building, and(g)the construction in a wall adjoining any street or land not belonging to the owner of the wall, of a door opening on to such street or land.(5a)[ "Executive Officer" means an Executive Officer appointed under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer ) Act 2 of 1931.] [Municipal to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, applies clause (5a) has been inserted by Item No. 2, Schedule II, Punjab Act No. 2 of 1931.](5b)[ "ex-officio member" means a member referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 12 of this Act;] [Added by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994.](6)"explosive" and "petroleum" have the meanings assigned to those words in the Indian Explosives Act, 1884, and the Indian Petroleum Act, 1899, respectively,(7)"infectious disease" means cholera, plague, smallpox, [tuberculosis] [Inserted by the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 1933.] or such other dangerous disease as the State Government may notify in this behalf.(8)"inhabitant" includes any person ordinarily residing or carrying on business, or owning or occupying immovable property, in any municipality or in any local area which, the State Government has by notification under this Act proposed to declare to be a municipality ; and in case of any dispute, means any person or persons declared by the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted 'Commissioner' by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] to be inhabitant or inhabitants.(8a)[ "land" includes benefits to arise out of land, things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth and rights created by law over any street.] [Added by Act No. 6 of 1995.](8aa)[] [Added by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994 as (8a) and renumbered by Act No. 6 of 1995.] "market value" means the market value of the land or the building which is determined in accordance with the principles contained in section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, or is determined in accordance with the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908;(8b)"Municipal Council" means a Municipality constituted under sub-section (2) of section 4 of this Act for a smaller urban area ; and(8c)"Municipal area" means the territorial area of a Municipality specified under section 4 of this Act;'(9)[ "Municipality" means an institution of self government constituted as a Nagar Panchayat or a Municipal Council under sub-section (2) of section 4 of this Act;] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994.](9a)[ "Nagar Panchayat" means a Municipality constituted under sub-section (2) of section 4 of this Act for a transitional area;] [Substituted by Amending Act No. 11 of 1994.](9b)[ "newly constituted committee" means a committee the members whereof have been elected at a general election but have been not taken or made an oath or affirmation of allegiance as required under section 24;] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1972 and renumbered from 9(a) to 9(b) by Act No. 11 of 1994.](10)"occupier" includes an owner in actual occupation of his own land or building, and also any person for the time being paying or liable to pay to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of which the word is used : for the purposes of Chapter V and IX occupier shall include hotel-keeper, lodging house-keeper, and any owner whose premises are let to more than one tenant.(11)"owner" includes the person for the time being receiving the rent of land and buildings, or either of them, whether on his own account or as agent or trustee for any person or society or for any religious or charitable purpose or who would so receive the same if the land or building were let to a tenant.(11a)" population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding Census, of which the relevant figures have been published;(11aa)[ "premises" means any land or building or part of a building and includes - [Added by Act No. 6 of 1995.](a)the garden, ground and out-houses, if any, appertaining to a building or part of a building ; and(b)and fitting affixed to a building or part of a building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof;](11b)"relation" in relation to an owner of any land or building means wife, husband, son, son-in-law, daughter, daughter-in-law, brother brother-inlaw, sister, sister-in-law of such owner;";(12)"rules" and "rule" mean, respectively, the rules made or to be made and notified by the State Government under the authority of this Act, and any one of such rules.(12a)"State Election Commission" means the Election Commission Constituted by the State Government under articles 243 K and 243 ZA of the Constitution of India;".(13)[ (a) "street", shall mean any road, footway, square, court, alley, or passage, accessible, whether permanently or temporarily to the public, and whether a thoroughfare or not; and shall include every vacant space, notwithstanding that it may be private property and partly or wholly obstructed by any gate, post, chain or other barrier, if houses, shops or other buildings about thereon, and if it is used by any person as a means of access to or from any public place or thoroughfare, whether such persons be occupiers of such buildings or not, but shall not include any part of such space which the occupier of any such building has a right at all hours to prevent all other persons from using as aforesaid : [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.]and shall include also the drains or gutters therein, or on either side, and the land, whether covered or not by any pavement, verandah or other erection, up to the boundary of any abutting property not accessible to the public.(b)"public street" shall mean any street -(i)heretofore levelled, payed, metalled, channelled, swerved, or repaired out of municipal or other public funds, unless before such work was carried out there was an agreement with the proprietor that the street should not thereby become a public street, or unless such work was done without the implied or express consent of the proprietor; or(ii)which under the provision of section 171, is declared by the committee to be, or under any other provision of this act becomes, a public street.](14)"vehicle" shall include bicycles, tricycles and automotor cars, and every wheeled conveyance which is used or capable of being used on a public street.(15)[ "Medical Officer of Health" means such person as the committee has appointed Medical Officer of Health, or such person as the [State] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 11 of 1994.] Government may by notification appoint Medical Officer of Health or failing such appointment, the District Medical Officer of Health.](16)"factory" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Factories [Act, 1911.] [Since repealed, Now see The Factories Act, 1948.](17)[ "Public place" means a space which is open to the use or enjoyment of the public whether or not private property and whether or not vested in the committee. [Clause 17 and 18 were inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.](18)(a)"built area" is that portion of a municipality of which the greater part has been developed as a business or residential area.(b)"unbuilt area" is an area within the municipal limits which is declared to be such at a special meeting of the committee by a resolution confirmed by the State Government, or which is notified as such by the State Government.](19)[ "dung" for the purposes of sections 154-A and 154-B shall include night-soil, sewage, sullage, sludge, refuse, filth or rubbish or animal matter of any kind. [Inserted by East Punjab Act No. 20 of 1249.](20)"compost manure" means the produce prepared from dung by subjecting it to the process of compost making in the manner prescribed by rules.](21)[ "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.] [Clause 21 inserted by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.]4. Specification of Local areas to be smaller urban areas or transitional areas and constitution of Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats. - [(1) The State Government may, having regard to population of the area the density of the population therein, the revenue generated for local administration the percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors, as it may deem fit, specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any area to be a transitional area or a smaller urban area for the purposes of this Act :Provided that no military cantonment or any part thereof shall be included in such transitional area or a smaller urban area :Provided further that such an urban area or part thereof, as the State Government may, having regard to the size of the area and municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as it may deem fit, by notification, specify to be an industrial township shall not form part of a transitional area or a smaller urban area.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.](2)Where an area is specified as a transitional area or as a smaller urban area under sub-section (1), the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the transitional area so specified a Nagar Panchayat and for the smaller urban area so specified a Municipal Council of the first class, second class or third class :Provided that the State Government may, after consulting the Municipal Council by notification change its classification from one class to another.(3)where any area which is within the jurisdiction of any other local authority, is constituted as or included in a transitional area or smaller urban area, the State Government may pass such orders as it may deem fit as to the transfer of such area to the Nagar Panchayat of such transitional area or disposal otherwise, of the assets or institutions of such local authority and as to the discharge of the liabilities, if any, of such local authority, relating to such assets or institutions.(4)Where any area is excluded from a transitional area or a smaller urban area and included in the area of any other local authority, the State Government may pass such orders as it may deem fit as to the transfer to such local authority or disposal otherwise of, the assets or institution, of such local authority in that area or as to the discharge of the liabilities, if any, of such local authority, relating to such assets and institutions.(5)Every area, which immediately before the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act 11, 1994 was constituted as a Municipality under this Act, shall be deemed to have been constituted as smaller urban area under sub-section (1) and Municipality existing for that area before such commencement and specified in Schedule II shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act for that area.(6)Every area, which immediately before the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act 11, 1994, was constituted as a Notified Area under section 241 of this Act, shall be deemed to have been specified as a transitional area or a smaller urban area under sub-section (1), and a Municipality of the category as indicated in schedule III shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act for that area.5. [ Alteration of limits of Municipality. [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] (1)The State Government may, from time to time, keeping in view the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4 and after consultation with the concerned Municipality, by notification in the Official Gazette alter the limits specified for any municipal area so as to include therein or to exclude therefrom such area as may be specified in the notification.(2)The power to issue a notification under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the condition of previous publication.]6. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]7. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]8. Reservation of Seats. - [(1) In every Municipality, out of the total number of elected members determined under sub-section (3) of section 12, the State Government shall, by notification, reserve -(a)such number of seats for the Scheduled casts as may be determined by the State Government, subject to the condition that the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality, as the population of the Scheduled Castes, in the Municipal area bears to the total population of that area, and, such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies to be known as wards in the Municipality;(b)one seat for the Backward Classes, and, such a seat may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies to be known as wards in the Municipality.](2)[ One half of the total number of seats reserved under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes:Provided that a fraction of a seat shall not be trated as a seat for the purpose of reservation.(3)One half (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different consitituencies to be known as wards in the Municipality:Provided that a fraction of a seat shall not be treated as a seat for the purpose of reservation.] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. No. 14 of 2017, dated 17.7.2017.]Explanation. - In this section the expression, -(a)"Scheduled Castes" shall have the meaning assigned to them in clause (24) of Article 366 of the Constitution of India; and(b)"Backward Classes" means the Backward Classes as the State Government may, from time to time, declare by issuing a notification in the Official Gazette.".8A. Reservation of offices Presidents. - [Offices of Presidents of the Municipalities in the State shall be reserved by rotation in the prescribed manner in the following ratio, namely : -(a)five per cent for the Scheduled Castes;(b)five per cent for women including women belonging to the Scheduled Castes ; and(c)two per cent for the Backward Classes.]9. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***] [Added by Act No. 11 of 1994.]10. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.]11. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]12. Composition of Municipalities. - [(1) A Municipal Council or a Nagar Panchayat constituted under section 4 shall consist of a body of members, specified in section (3), having authority over such area.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.](2)The Nagar Panchayat or the Municipal Council constituted under sub- section (1) shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with powers, subject to the provisions of this Act, to hold, acquire and dispose of property and may by that name sue or be sued.(3)The Nagar Panchayat or the Municipal Council constituted under sub- section (1) shall consist of the following members, namely : -(i)such number of elected members as may be determined from time to time by the State Government in accordance with the prescribed principles; and(ii)all members of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies comprising wholly or partly the Municipal area."12A. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]12B. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]12C. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]12D. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]12E. [ [Omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] ***]13. Duration of Municipalities. - [(1) Every Municipality save as otherwise provided in this Act, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.]Explanation.- In this section "first meeting" means the meeting of the newly constituted Municipality held for the election of its President and Vice-President under section 20 of this Act.(2)All Municipalities existing immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth) Amendment Act, 1992, shall continue till the expiration of their duration unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the State Legislature.(3)An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed, -(a)before the expiry of its duration specified in sub-section (1);(b)before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution:Provided that when the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under clause (b) for constituting the municipality for such period.(4)The first election to a Municipality constituted under this Act after the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act 1994, shall be held within a period of six months of its being notified as such.(5)Elections to the Municipalities where no elected body exists immediately before the commencement of Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act 1994, shall be held within a period of six months from the date of such commencement.6. A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under sub-section (1) had it not been so dissolved.13A. Power of State Government to direct holding of general election. - [(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act No. and the rules made thereunder, the State Government, may, by notification, direct that a general election of the members of the Municipalities or an election to fill a casual vacancy shall be held by such date as may be specified in the notification and different dates may be specified for elections for different Municipalities or group or groups of Municipalities.(2)As soon as a notification is issued under sub-section (1), the Election Commissioner shall take necessary steps for holding such general election.] [Added by Act No. 11 of 1994.]14. Dissolution of Municipalities. - [(1) If in the opinion of the State Government, a Municipality is not competent to perform its duties or persistently makes default in the performance of duties imposed on it by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, or exceeds or abuses any of its powers, the State Government may, by an order publish, alongwith reasons thereof, in the Official Gazette, dissolve such Municipality:Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its dissolution.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.](2)When a Municipality is dissolved under sub-section (1),-(i)all members of the Municipality shall vacate their offices forthwith;(ii)all powers and duties of the Municipality during its dissolution shall be exercised and performed by such person or authority, as the State Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf; and(iii)all property in possession of the Municipality shall be held by the State Government.(3)Upon dissolution of a Municipality under sub-section (1) the State Government shall re-constitute a Municipality as specified under section 12 and election to reconstitute such Municipality shall be completed before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of dissolution:Provided that where the remainder of the period for which dissolved Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this sub-section for reconstituting the Municipality for such period.(4)The Municipality reconstituted upon the dissolution of the existing Municipality before the expiration of its duration, shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under section 13 had it not been so dissolved.15. [ Resignation of member of committee. [Substituted for the old section by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] - If a member of committee wishes to resign his office he shall submit an application in writing through the Deputy Commissioner to the State Government. If such resignation is accepted, it shall be notified in the gazette on a date not less than 15 days and not more than 60 days after the receipt of the said member's application by the Deputy Commissioner whereupon the member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat:Provided that if a member who has submitted an application to resign wishes to withdraw his resignation he may apply to the Deputy Commissioner within 15 days of the receipt by the Deputy Commissioner of his application to resign, and the application to resign shall then be deemed to have been withdrawn.]16. Powers of the State Government as to removal of members. (1)The State Government may, by notification [remove any member of a committee other than an associate member] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1972.] :(a)if he refuses to act, or becomes, in the opinion of the State Government, incapable of acting, or has been declared a bankrupt or an insolvent or has been convicted of any such offence or subjected by a criminal court to any such order as implies, in the opinion of the State Government, a defect of character which unfits him to be a member,(b)if he has been declared by notification to be disqualified for employment in, or has been dismissed from, the public service and the reason for the disqualification or dismissal is such as implies in the opinion of the State Government a defect of character which unfits him to be a member;(c)if he has [without reasonable cause in the opinion of the State Government absented himself for more than three consecutive months from the meetings of the committee.] [Vide Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.](d)if his continuance in office is, in the opinion of the State Government, dangerous to the public peace or order;(e)[ if, in the opinion of the State Government he has flagrantly abused his position as a member of the committee or has through negligence or misconduct been responsible for the loss, or misapplication of any money or property of the committee:] [See Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.](f)[ if he has, since his election or co-option, become subject to any disqualification which, if it had existed at the time of his election or co-option, would have rendered him ineligible under any rule; for the time being in force regulating the qualification of candidates for election, or if it appears that he was at the time of his election or co- option, subject to any such disqualification:] [Clause (f) substituted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1972.](g)[ if, being a legal practitioner, he acts or appears in any legal proceeding on behalf of any person against the committee, or on behalf of or against the Government where in the opinion of the State Government such action or appearance is contrary to the interests of the committee.] [See Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.][Provided that before the State Government notifies the removal of a member under the section, the reasons for his proposed removal shall be communicated to the member concerned and he shall be given an opportunity of tendering an explanation in writing] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.].(2)[ A person removed under this section [***] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1933.] or whose election or appointment has been deemed to be invalid under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 24, or whose election has been declared void for corrupt practices or intimidation under the provisions of section 255, or whose election the State Government [or the Deputy Commissioner] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] has under section 24 refused to notify, shall be disqualified for election for a period not exceeding five years:Provided that a person whose election or appointment has been deemed to be invalid under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 24, shall not be disqualified for election or appointment for a period exceeding two years from the date of disqualification.[(3) A person, whose seat has been vacated under the provisions of section 14(2) may be disqualified for election for a period not exceeding five years.] [See Punjab Act No. 3 of 1935.]]17. Filing of casual vacancies of Members. - [(1) Whenever a vacancy occurs by death, resignation, removal or otherwise of a member, the same shall be filled up by way of election :Provided that if the vacancy so occurred relates to the Scheduled Castes Backward Classes or to women it shall be filled up out of the persons belonging to the category to which it relates.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.](2)A person elected to fill up a casual vacancy shall be elected for the remainder of his successors' term of office :Provided that where the remainder of the period for which a member is to be elected, is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election to fill up such a vacancy.18. Incorporation of Committee. - Every committee shall be a body corporate by the name of the municipal committee of its municipality; and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and subject to the provisions of this Act, or of any rules made thereunder to transfer any property held by it to contract and to do all other things necessary for the purposes of its constitution; and may sue and be sued in its corporate name.19. [ Officers, servants and members to be public servants. [Substituted for the old section by section 8 of Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] - Every officer or servant employed by the committee whether for the whole or part of his time and every member of the committee shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.]20. Election of President and Vice-President. - [(1) Every Municipality shall, from time to time, elect one of its members to be its president, and the member so elected shall, on being notified by the State Government, shall become President of the Municipality.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.](2)Every Municipality may also, from time to time, elect one or two of its members to be Vice-President or Vice-Presidents and when two Vice- Presidents are elected on the same date, the Municipality shall declare which of them shall be deemed to be the senior.(3)Notwithstanding anything contained in this section an ex-officio member shall not be eligible for election as President or Vice-President of the Municipality.21. [Term of office of President and Vice-President. [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] - The term of office of President of a Municipality shall be co-terminus with the term of the Municipality.(2)The term of office of Vice-President of the Municipality shall be such as the Municipality may fix under its bye-laws.(3)An outgoing President or the Vice-President shall, if otherwise qualified, be eligible for the re-election.]22. Resignation [or removal] [Words added by Act No. 11 of 1994.] of President and Vice-President. - Whenever a President or Vice-President vacates his seat or tenders in writing to the committee his resignation of his office, he shall vacate his office; and any president or vice-president may be removed from office by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government on the ground of abuse of his powers of or habitual failure to perform his duties or in pursuance of a resolution requesting his removal passed by two-thirds of the members of the committee :[Provided that if a resolution requesting the removal of the President or the Vice-President is passed by two-thirds of the members of the committee the President or, as the case may be the Vice- President shall be deemed to be under suspension immediately after such resolution is passed] [See Punjab Act No. 19 of 1982.] :Provided further that before the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government notifies his removal, the reason for his proposed removal shall be communicated to him by means of a registered letter in which he shall be [called upon] [Substituted for 'invited' by the Act No. 11 of 1994.] to tender within twenty-one days an explanation in writing and if no such explanation is received in the office of the [appropriate Secretary to Government] [Substituted for 'Secretary Transferred Departments' by Adaptation of Laws (Third Amendment) Order of 1951.] within twenty one days of the despatch of the said registered letter, the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government may proceed to notify his removal.23. Casual vacancies in office of President or Vice President. - Upon the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of President or Vice-President, a new President or Vice-President shall be elected [***] [Words 'or appointed' omitted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] in manner provided by Section 20.24. [ Notification of election and oath or affirmation of allegiance. [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.] (1)No elected member of a Municipality shall enter upon his duties as such member until he has taken or made, at a meeting of the Municipality, an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to India in the following form, namely : -"I, A.B. having been elected Member of the Nagar Panchayat or Municipal Council of.......do hereby solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to India and to the Constitution of India as by the law established and I will faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter".(2)The State Government shall notify in the Official Gazette every election of President of a Municipality and no President shall enter upon his duties as such until his election is so notified :Provided that the State Government may refuse to notify the election as President of any person who has incurred a disqualification under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force, subsequent to his election as member of the Municipality :Provided further that the State Government shall not refuse to notify the election of the President without giving an opportunity of being heard to the concerned person.]Conduct of Business25. Times of holding Meetings. (1)Every committee shall meet for the transaction of business at least once in every month at such time as may, from time to time, be fixed by the bye-laws.(2)The President or, in the absence [or during the vacancy of his office [or during his suspension under Section 22] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1983.]] a Vice-President may, whenever he thinks fit and shall on a requisition [specifying the purpose of the meeting made in writing] [Inserted Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.] by not less than one fifth of the members of the committee, convene either an ordinary or a special meeting at any other time.(3)[ If the President or the Vice-President, as the case may be, fails to call a meeting of the committee within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of requisition, the members who had signed the requisition may convene a meeting of the committee in accordance with the bye-laws of the committee within a period of thirty days of the making of such requisition and notwithstanding anything contained in this Act such meeting shall be deemed to be a validity conveyened meeting :Provided that no business other than that specified in the requisition shall be transacted in such meeting and the quorum for such a meeting shall be as provided for a special meeting under sub-section (1) of Section 27.] [Sub-section (3) added by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.]26. Ordinary and special meeting. (1)Every meeting of committee shall be either ordinary or special.(2)Any business may be transacted at an ordinary meeting unless required by this Act or the rules to be transacted at a special meeting.(3)[ When a special and an ordinary meeting are called for the same day the special meeting shall be held as soon as the necessary quorum is present.] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.]27. Quorum. (1)The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a special meeting of a committee shall be one-half of the number of the committee actually serving at the time, but shall not be less than three.(2)The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at an ordinary meeting of a committee shall be such number or proportion of the members of the committee as may, from time to time, be fixed by the bye-laws, but shall not be less than three :Provided that, if at any ordinary or special meeting of a committee a quorum is not present, the chairman shall adjourn the meeting to such other day as he may thin fit, and the business which would have been brought before the original meeting if there had been a quorum present shall be brought before, and transacted at, the adjourned meeting, whether there be a quorum present thereat or not.28. Chairman of meeting. - At every meeting of a committee the President, if present, or, in his absence or during the vacancy of office, [or during his suspension under Section 22 the senior Vice-President present, and if there be no President or Vice-President present, then such one of their number [other than an associate member] [Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 19 of 1982.] as the members present may elect shall preside as chairman.]29. Vote of majority decisive. - Except as otherwise provided by this Act or the rules, all questions which come before any meeting of a committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present, the chairman of the meeting, in case of an equality of votes, having a second or casting vote.30. Record and publication of proceedings. (1)Minutes of the proceedings at each meeting of a committee shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose, shall be signed by the chairman of the meeting or of the next ensuing meeting, shall be published in such manner as the [State] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] Government may direct, and shall, at all reasonable times and without charge, be open to inspection by any inhabitant.(2)A copy of every resolution passed at any meeting of a committee shall, within three days from the date of the meeting, be forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner.31. [ Bye-laws. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] - Every committee may, from time to time, and shall, if so required by the State Government provide by bye-laws consistent with this Act and with the rules for] -(a)the time and place of its meeting ;(b)the manner in which notice of ordinary and special meetings and adjourned meetings shall be given ;(c)the quorum necessary for the transaction of business at ordinary meetings;(d)the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the adjournment of meeting;(e)the custody of the common seal and the purposes for which it shall be used;(f)the appointment of sub-committees and their duties, the division of duties among the members of the committee and the powers to be exercised by such members as are primarily responsible for the current executive administration, whether Presidents, Vice-Presidents members of sub-committees or individual members ;(g)the persons by whom receipts shall be granted on behalf of the committee for money received under this Act ;(gg)[ the condition on which registers, documents, maps and plans of the Committee may be inspected by the public, and copies of them supplied, and the fees payable for such inspection or for the supply of such copies;] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933](h)the appointment, duties, executive powers, leave, suspension and removal of its officers and servants ;(i)the term for which a Vice-President shall hold office ;(j)appeal from executive orders of sub-committees, the President, Vice-President, member, officers and servants of the committee ;(k)all other similar matters.(2)[ No bye-laws made under clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (f) of sub-section (1) shall take effect until it has been approved by the [State] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] Government.](3)Every bye-law made under this section shall be published in such manner as the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government may direct.Delegation of Powers32. [ Delegation of certain powers and functions of State Government. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] - The State Government may, by notification, delegate all or any of its powers under this Act, except the power to frame forms or make rules under Section 240, to any officer not below the rank of an Extra Assistant Commissioner, subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification.]33. [ Delegation of certain powers and functions of committees. [Substituted for the old section by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933 Section 15, Sections 33, 46 and 47 shall be deemed to be omitted in the case of Municipalities to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, applies. - vide Item No. 2, Schedule II, Act No. 3 of 1931, ibid.] (1)Notwithstanding anything in this Act every committee may subject to the provisions of Section 46, with the previous sanction of the State Government [***] by resolution delegate : -(a)to the President, a Vice-President, the Secretary or a sub- committee all or any of the powers conferred upon 'the committee by Sections 39, 72, 75, 77, 97, 98, 101, [***] [Figure 105 omitted by the Punjab Adaptation of Laws Order, 1968.] 109(1), 110, 113, 114, 115, 115-A, 117, 118, 119, 122, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 140, 142, 143, 145(b) and (c), 166, 169(c), 170, 170-A (1) and (2), 172(2), 173, 176, [176-A] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 12 of 1950.], 191, 195-A, 203 to 208 (both inclusive), 210, 211, 212, and 220 ;(b)to the Medical Officer of Health all or any of the powers conferred upon the committee under Sections 39, 105, 109, 113, 114, 115, 115- A, 116, 117, 118, 119, 125, 126, 128, 131, 142, 143, 144, 145, clauses (b) and (c), 146, 149, 155, 157, 166, 182, 203, 204, 205, clause (b), 206, 208, 211 and 212 ;(c)and to the Inspector-General of Civil Hospitals, Civil Surgeon of the district or any officer of the Department of Public Instructions or Public Health all or any of the powers conferred upon the committee under Section 39 ;(d)and to the Municipal Engineer the powers conferred upon the committee under Section 195-A and under Section 195, except to the extent that composition under that section shall require the sanction of the committee;in respect of all or particular classes of cases arising under these sections, and for the whole or any part of the municipality and may, by resolution, withdraw the powers so delegated.(2)The delegation by the committee of any power under sub-section (1) may be made subject to the condition that all or any orders made in pursuance or such delegation shall be subject to the right of appeal to or revision by, the committee within such period as may by bye-law be prescribed.]34. Appointment of wards sub-committees. (1)With the previous sanction of the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government, and subject to such conditions as the State Government may prescribe,[a committee may appoint a sub-committee consisting of such members as it may deem fit for the management of any one or more wards] [ Substituted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] and may delegate to the sub-committee all or any of the powers of the committee to be exercised within the ward or wards.(2)The sub-committee shall, if necessary, from time to time, appoint one of its members to be chairman of the sub-committee.35. [ Extraordinary powers of President or Vice-President in case of emergency. [Substituted for the old section by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933 Section 16. In the case of Municipalities to which the Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, applies Section 35 has been amended, vide Item No. Schedule II, Punjab Act 2 of 1931, as amended by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1934.] (1)On the occurrence or threatened occurrence of any event involving or likely to involve extensive damage to property or danger to human life or grave inconvenience to the public, the President or the Executive Officer or, in the absence of the President or during the vacancy of his office, a Vice- President may, if in his opinion there is an emergency necessitating action before the matter can be considered by the committee, direct the execution of any such work or the doing of any such act which the committee is empowered to execute or do, as the emergency shall in his opinion justify or require, and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such act be paid from the municipal fund :Provided that every such action taken under this section shall be reported to the committee at its next meeting.(2)The President or Vice-President [or the Executive Officer] shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the committee.(3)The President [or in his absence] [The words 'in his absence' shall be submitted by 'or the Executive Officer or in the absence of the President' by item 3, Schedule II of Punjab Act No. 2 of 1931, in the case of Municipalities to which Punjab Act No. 2 of 1931, applies.] or during the vacancy of his office a Vice-President may prohibit, until the matter has been considered by the committee, the doing of any act which is in his opinion undesirable in the public interest :Provided that the act is one which the committee has power to prohibit.(4)No direction given in this section shall be questioned in any court on the ground that the case was not one of emergency.]Joint Committees36. Joint Committees. - A committee may concur with any other committee, or with any district board, or with any cantonment authority, or with more than one such committee, board or authority in appointing out of their respective bodies a joint committee for any purpose in which they are jointly interested and in delegating to any such joint committee any power which might be exercised by either or any of the committees, boards or authorities concerned, and in framing or modifying regulations as to the proceedings of any such joint committee, and as to the conduct of correspondence relating thereto.Defects in Constitution and Irregularities37. Vacancies and irregularities not to invalidate proceedings. - No act done or proceeding taken under this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in any committee or joint committee, or on account of any defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.Officers and Servants38. [ Constitution of Municipal Services. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973, Section 8. This section came into force on 1.12.1975 vide notification No. GSR 119/PA/24/73/SI 75 dated 12.11.1975 published on 24.11.1975.] (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act No., the State Government may by notification, constitute in the prescribed manner all or any of the following Municipal Services, namely : -(i)Punjab Service of Municipal Executive Officers ;(ii)Punjab Service of Municipal Engineers and Sectional Officers ;(iii)Punjab Service of Municipal Health Officers ;(iv)Punjab Service of Municipal Secretaries ;(v)Punjab Service of Municipal Accountants ; and(vi)such other Municipal Services as the State Government may decide.(2)The State Government may make rules for regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of members of the Municipal Services referred to in sub-section (1) and for the classification of such Services.(3)The State Government may transfer any member of a Municipal Service from a post in one committee to a post carrying the same scale of pay in another committee.(4)The salary, allowances, gratuity, annuity, pension and other payments required to be made to the members of the Municipal Services in accordance with the conditions of their service shall be charged from the municipal fund in the prescribed manner.(5)Creation of posts in a Municipal Service and appointment of members thereto shall be made by the State Government or by an authority empowered by the State Government in this behalf after taking into consideration the requirements of the committees and their financial capacity but no such member shall be deemed to have been appointed to any civil service or post under the State.(6)Every person, who, immediately before the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), is serving in a committee on a post in relation to which a Municipal Service is constituted, shall, on the issue of such notification, become a member of the corresponding Municipal Service, if he is found fit by an authority appointed by the Government in this behalf for becoming such a member on the basis of his qualification and service record :Provided that his terms and conditions of service in so far as they relate to remuneration, gratuity and provident fund shall not be varied to his dis-advantage on his becoming a member of the Municipal Service :Provided further that any such person may, by notice in writing given to the State Government, within a period of thirty days of the constitution of the Municipal Service, intimate his intention of not becoming a member of such Service and where such an intimation is given that person will not become a member of the corresponding Municipal Service and will continue to be governed by the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him immediately before the constitution of the Municipal Service.[(6-A). In the case of a person who is not found fit under sub section 6 for becoming a member of the corresponding Municipal Service the post on which he is serving shall be deemed to have been abolished on the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Second Amendment) Act, 1976, if the decision that he is not so fit was taken at any time before such commencement and in the case of others as and when such a decision is taken :Provided that the Government may appoint such a person, with his consent on a post in any other Municipal Service to which he may be found suitable.](7)[ Recruitment of members of the Municipal Services referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made by the State Government or by any authority empowered by the State Government in this behalf and nothing contained in the Punjab Public Service Commission (Additional Functions) Act, 1955, shall be deemed to apply to or require consultation with the Punjab Public Service Commission in respect of such requirement.] [Sub-section 7 substituted by Punjab Act No. 29 of 1975.]]39. Employment of other officers and servants. (1)Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder, a committee may, and if so required by the State Government shall, employ other officers and servants and may assign to such officers and servants such remuneration as it may think fit, and may suspend, remove, dismiss, or otherwise punish any officer or servant so appointed.[Provided that no person who is a member of a committee shall be employed by a committee during the tenure of his term and for a period of twelve months thereafter.] [Proviso added by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.](2)[ Nothing in this section shall prevent the State Government from making any provision in the rules under this Act for the reservation of appointments or posts and to lay down methods to secure such reservation in favour of members of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and such other backward classes of citizens which in the opinion of the State Government are not adequately represented in the services under the Municipal Committee.] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 28 of 1956.]40. [ [Omitted by Act No. 8 of 1974.] ***]41. Powers to demand punishment or dismissal. - If in the opinion of the State Government any officer or servant of the committee is negligent in the discharge of his duties, the committee shall on the requirement of the State Government, suspend, fine or otherwise punish him : and if in the opinion of the State Government he is unfit for his employment, the committee shall dismiss him[Provided that before requiring the committee to suspend, fine or otherwise punish any officer or servants or before declaring any officer or servant as unfit for employment, the State Government shall give to the concerned officer or servant an opportunity of being heard.] [Proviso added by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.]42. Power to prevent extravagance in establishments. - If, in the opinion of the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted ''Commissioner' by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1933.], the number of person employed by a Committee as officers or servants, or whom the Committee may propose to employ as such [other than those officers or servants, in respect whereof a Municipal Service has been constituted] [Certain words inserted by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973, Section II which came into force on 1.12.1975 vide notification No. GSR 119/PA/24/73/S./75 dated 12.11.1975 published on 24.11.1975.] or the remuneration assigned by the committee to those persons or any of them is excessive, the committee shall, on the requirement of the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted 'Commissioner' by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1933.], reduce the number of those persons or the remuneration, as the case may be:Provided that the committee may appeal against any such requirement to the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government, and the decision of the State Government, on any such appeal shall be final.43. Pensions, leave allowances and provident fund. - If an officer or servant of a committee is [person in the service of the [Government)] [Substituted for the word 'Government Official' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.], the committee may -](a)if his services are wholly lent to it, [make such contributions to his pensions, gratuity and leave allowances as may be required by the conditions of his service under the Government to be paid by him or on his behalf] [Substituted for the words 'contribute to his pension, gratuity and leave allowances in accordance with any general or special orders of the Governor-General in Council in force for the time being' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] ; and(b)if he devotes only a part of his time to the performance of duties on behalf of the committee, contribute to his pension gratuity and leave allowance in such proportion as may be determined by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government.(2)If an officer or servant of a committee is not a [person in the service of the Government] [Substituted for the word 'Government Official' by the Government of India (Adaption of Indian Laws), Order, 1937.], the committee may, subject to such conditions as the State Government may prescribe -(a)grant him leave, absentee or acting allowance ; and(b)[ if his pay is less than [seventy rupees] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] a month, either permit him to contribute to a provident or annuity fund established under (c) or grant him a gratuity on retirement ; and](c)if his pay is over seventy rupees a month establish and maintain a provident or annuity fund and compel him to contribute thereto.](d)where such a fund has not been established or where such a fund has been established but he has been contributing thereto for less than the whole of his service, grant him a gratuity or purchase or arrange for an annuity for him on his retirement.(3)With the sanction of the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government the committee may give an extraordinary pension or gratuity -(a)to any officer or servant injured in the execution of his duty;(b)to the family of any officer or servant who is killed in the execution of his duty or whose death is due to devotion to duty.(4)A pension, gratuity or annuity shall not exceed the sum to which [***] [The words 'under any general or special orders of the Governor-General in Council for the time being in force', were omitted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] such officer or servant or his family would be entitled if the service had been service under the Government.44. Pension, etc. in case of service partly under the Government and partly under committee. (1)If a person serving or having served under a committee has been or is transferred from or to the service of the Government or is partly employed by the Government and partly by a committee, the committee shall [make] [Substituted for the words 'contribute to his pension and leave allowances to the extent required by the rules in force for the time being made by the Governor-General in council in this behalf' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] such contributions to his pension and leave allowances as may be required, by the conditions of his service under the Government, to be paid by him or on his behalf].(2)[ In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, the committee may dispense with the services of any such person by giving the [Government concerned] [Substituted by Section 14 of Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] one month's previous notice.]45. Notice before discharge. (1)In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every officer or servant employed by a committee shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge [***] [The words 'or to one month's wages in lieu thereof' omitted by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.] unless he is discharged during a period of probation or for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it.(2)[ Should any officer or servant employed by a committee, in the absence of a written contract authorising him so to do, and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice to the committee he shall be liable to forfeit a sum not exceeding one month's wages out of any wages due to him, and if no wages, or less than one month's wages, are due to him, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding wages for one month or an amount equal to the difference between one month's wages and the wages due to him, which shall be recoverable in the manner provided by Section 81] [Substituted for the old sub-section by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1933.].(3)[ and (4) ***] [Sub-section (3) and (4) omitted by the Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.].Contracts46. [ Authority to contract. [This section shall be deemed to be omitted in the case of Municipalities to which the Municipal (Executive Officers) Act, 1931, applies-vide Items No. 2, Schedule II, Punjab Act 2 of 1931, as amended by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1934.] (1)The committee of any municipality of the first class may, subject to the provisions of this Act, delegate to one or more of its members [other than an associate member] the power of entering on its behalf into any particular contract whereof the value or amount does not exceed five hundred rupees, or into any class of such contracts.(2)No contract by or on behalf of any committee whereof the value or amount exceeds five hundred rupees shall be entered into until it has been sanctioned at a meeting of committee.]47. Mode of executing contracts and transfer of property. (1)Every contract made by or on behalf of the committee of any municipality of the first class whereof the value or amount exceeds one hundred rupees, and every contract made by or on behalf of the committee of any municipality of the second [and third class] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1934.] whereof the value or amount exceeds fifty rupees, shall be in writing, and must be signed by two members, of whom the President or a Vice President shall be one, and countersigned by the Secretary :Provided that, when the power of entering into any contract on behalf of the committee has been delegated under the last foregoing section, the signature or signatures of the members to whom the power has been delegated shall be sufficient.(2)Every transfer of immovable property belonging to any committee must be made by an instrument in writing, executed by the President or Vice President, and by at least two other members of committee, whose execution thereof shall be attested by the Secretary.(3)No contract or transfer of the description mentioned in this section executed otherwise than in confirmity with the provisions of this section shall be binding on this committee.48. [ Penalty on member, officer or servant being interested in any contract made with a committee. [Substituted for the old sub-section by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] (1)If any member, officer or servant of a committee or of a joint committee, without the previous permission in writing of the [Deputy Commissioner] voluntarily renders himself interested in any contract made with that committee, or if within one month of his becoming interested in any such contract he neither resigns or obtains the permission in writing of the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953, Schedule II, for 'Commissioner'.] for his remaining a member, officer or servant of the committee in spite of his interest in such contract, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 168 of the Indian Penal Code :Provided that for the purposes of this sub-section a person who has been elected but whose election has not been notified shall be deemed to be a member.](2)No member, officer or servant of a committee or a joint committee shall by reason only of his being a shareholder, in, or a member of, any incorporated or registered company, be held to be interested in any contract entered into between the said company and the committee ; or joint committee but no such person as aforesaid shall take part in any proceedings of the committee or joint committee relating to any such contracts.Privileges and Liabilities49. Suits against committee and its officers. - No suit shall be instituted against a committee, or against any officer or servant of a committee, in respect of any act purporting to be done in its or his official capacity, until the expiration of one month next after notice in writing has been, in the case of a committee, delivered or left at its office, and in the case of an officer or servant, delivered to him or left at his office or place of abode, stating the cause of action and the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff : and the plaint must contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left :Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any suit instituted under Section 54 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877.50. [ Liability of members of the committee. [Substituted for the old section by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] (1)Every person shall be liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property belonging to a committee, if such loss, waste or misapplication is reported by the Examiner of Local Fund Accounts, or other audit authority empowered by the [State] Government in this behalf to be a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct in the performance of his duties while a member of the committee; and he may after being given an opportunity, by notice served in the manner provided for the service of summonses in the Civil Procedure Code, to show cause by written or oral representation why he should not be required to make good the loss, be surcharged with the value of such property or the amount of such money by the Deputy Commissioner.[*] [The words 'or if the Deputy Commissioner is a member of the Municipal Committee, by the Commissioner', omitted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] and if the amount is not paid within fourteen days from the expiry of the period of appeal prescribed by sub-section (2) the Collector at the request of the Deputy Commissioner [*] [The words 'or Commissioner, as the case may be', omitted by ibid.] shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue and have it credited to the municipal fund.(2)The person against whom an order under [sub-section] [Substituted for the word 'Clause' by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1934.] (1) is made, may within thirty days of the notification of such order appeal to the [State Government] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953, Schedule I, for 'Commissioner'.][***] [The words 'from the order of the Deputy Commissioner, or, if the order has been passed by the Commissioner, to the State Government' omitted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] who shall appoint an officer to hear the appeal : and the appellate authority shall have the power of confirming, modifying or disallowing the surcharge :Provided that no person shall under this section be called upon to show cause after the expiry of a period of four years from the occurrence of such loss, waste or misapplication or after the expiry of one year from the time of his ceasing to be a member :Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to debar the aggrieved party from seeking a remedy in a civil court against an order made under sub-section (1).(3)[ Nothing in this section shall apply to an associate member] [Sub-section (3) added by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1972.].][Chapter III-A] [Chapter III-A added by Act No. 11 of 1994.] Functions of the Municipalities50A. General powers of Municipalities. (1)Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rule, regulations and bye-laws made thereunder, the municipal administration of a smaller urban area and a transitional area shall vest in the Municipal Council and a Nagar Panchayat respectively.(2)Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the Municipality to consider all periodical statements of the receipts and disbursements and all progress reports and pass such resolutions thereon as it thinks fit.50B. Powers and Authorities of Municipalities. (1)Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 50-A, the State Government may, by notification endow the Municipalities with such powers and authorities as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to, -(i)the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;(ii)the performance of functions and implementation of the schemes which may be entrusted to them including the following, namely : -(1)urban planning including town planning;(2)regulation of land-use and construction of building;(3)planning for economic and social development;(4)roads and bridges;(5)water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes;(6)public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management;(7)fire services;(8)urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects;(9)safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded;(10)slum improvement and upgradation;(11)urban poverty alleviation;(12)provisions of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens and playgrounds;(13)promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects;(14)burials and burial grounds, cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematoriums;(15)cattle ponds and prevention of cruelty to animals;(16)vital statistics including registration of births and deaths;(17)public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences; and(18)regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.(2)Nothing contained in the provisions of this section shall be construed to divest the Municipalities of various powers and functions vested in them under various provisions of this Act, rules and bye-laws made thereunder."Chapter IVMunicipal Fund and Property 51. [ Constitution of municipal fund. [Substituted for the old sections by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] - There shall be formed for each municipality a municipal fund, and there shall be placed to the credit thereof -(a)all sums received by, or on behalf of the committee under this Act or otherwise [land];(b)the balance (if any) standing at the credit of the municipal fund of the municipality at the commencement of this Act].[***] ['The words 'and' was omitted by Punjab Act No. 15 of 1940.]]52. Application of fund. (1)The committee shall set apart and apply out of the municipal fund-(a)first, such as may be required for the payment of any amounts falling due on any loan legally contracted by it :(b)[ secondly, such sum as the committee may be required by the [State] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] Government to contribute towards the cost of such Local Self-Government Board or Inspectorate as the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government may establish, for the purpose of advising, assisting and supervising the work of municipal committees and other local bodies :Provided that such sum shall not exceed an amount equal to one perfect of the income for the financial year preceding the year, in which the committee is called upon to make the contribution]:(c)[ thirdly] [Substituted for the word 'secondly' by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.], such sum as may be required to meet the charges, of its own establishment, including such subscriptions and contributions as are referred to in Sections 43 and 44, and such sum as may be required for the maintenance of a police establishment under Chapter VI;(d)[ fourthly, such sum as may be required to pay the expenses incurred in auditing the accounts of the committee, and such portion of the costs of any public expenditure by the [Central Government] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] or the [State] [Substituted for the words 'Government of India' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] Government as may be held by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government to be equitably payable by the committee in return for services rendered to it.](e)[ fifthly, such sum as the committee may be required by the State Government to contribute towards the maintenance of pauper lunatics or pauper lepers sent from any place in the [State] [Clauses (e) and (f) were inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] to mental hospitals or public asylums whether in or outside the State.(f)sixthly, such sum as may be due to the State Government in respect of the cost of maintenance by the State Government, on behalf of the committee, of water-works, drainage, sewage or other works.](g)[ seventhly, such sum to be paid annually by the committee to the State Government by way of contribution as is equivalent to - [Clause (g) added by Punjab Act No. 22 of 1959, with effect from 1st October, 1957.](i)the total provision made in the budget for the year 1957-58 under the main head 'Education' excluding [the provision under the sub-heads relating to public libraries, colleges, reading rooms and museums or pertaining to such other matters not relating to schools as the State Government may specify, educational grants and the provisions made for 'original works' relating to schools ; and(ii)a sum representing one per centum of the total income from its own resources for the year 1957-58, in lieu of the deductions made for 'original works' made under clause (i):]Provided that in respect of the financial year 1957-58, the committee shall make a payment to the State Government of the sums which have remained unexpended on 31st March, 1958, out of the provisions under the head 'Education' in the budget of 1957-58 ;[Provided further that in computing the total provision under sub-section (i), school fees or other moneyes received from students by the Committee, income from any property transferred to the State Government, donations for education from the public and such other income of the Committee as may be specified by the State Government shall be excluded.] [Proviso added by Punjab Act No. 22 of 1961.]](2)Subject to the charges specified in sub-section (1) and to such rules as the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954.] Government may make with respect to the priority to be given to the several duties of the committee, the municipal fund shall be applicable to the payment in whole or part, of the charges and expenses incidential to the following matters within the municipality, and with the sanction of the [State Government] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1955, Schedule I, for 'Commissioner'.] outside the municipality, namely : -(a)the construction, maintenance, improvement, cleansing and repair of all public streets, bridges, town-walls, town-gates, embankments, drains, privies, latrines, urinals, tanks and water-courses [and the preparation of compost manure] [Inserted by East Punjab Act No. 30 of 1949.];(b)the watering and lighting of such streets or any of them ;(c)the construction, establishment and maintenance of schools, hospitals and dispensaries, and other institutions for the promotion of education or for the benefit of the public health, and of rest-houses, sarais, poor-houses, markets, [stalls] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 12 of 1950.], encamping grounds, pounds, and other works of public utility, and the control and administration of public institutions of any of these descriptions :(d)grant-in-aid to schools, hospitals, dispensaries, poor-houses, leper-asylums, and other educational or charitable institutions ;(e)the training of teachers and the establishment of scholarships;(f)the giving of relief and the establishment and maintenance of relief works in time of famine or scarcity;(g)the supply, storage and preservation from pollution of water for the use of men or animals ;(h)the planting and preservation of trees ; and the establishment and maintenance of public parks and gardens ;(i)the taking of a census, the registration of births, marriages and deaths, public vaccination and any sanitary measure ;(j)the holding of fairs and any industrial exhibitions ;(k)the preparation and maintenance of a record of rights in immovable property; and(l)all acts and things which are likely to promote the safety, health, welfare or convenience of the inhabitants or expenditure whereon may be declared by the committee, with the sanction of the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government to be an appropriate charge on the municipal fund.(3)[ Notwithstanding any contained in the foregoing sub-sections of this Act no charges or expenses shall be paid from the municipal fund incidential to any matter which has been specifically declared by the State Government by general or special order to be a matter in regard to which no expenditure shall be met from municipal fund.(4)Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder it shall be the duty of the President and of any member presiding at any meeting of the committee or of a sub-committee to disallow the consideration or discussion of any matter for which provision is not made in Section 52 or any other section of the Act.] [Sub-sections (3) and (4) were inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.]53. Payment of salary to president out of funds. - With the sanction of the State Government a salary of such amount as the State Government may fix may be paid to the president of a committee not being a salaried [officer of the Government] [The words 'Servant of the Crown' were substituted for the words 'officer of Government' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.][Government,] [Substituted for the word 'Crown' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] out of the municipal fund.54. Custody of municipal fund. - [(1) All moneys payable to the credit of the municipal fund shall be received by a municipal employee authorised by the committee in this behalf and shall be forthwith paid into the State Bank of India, in a Treasury of the Government, in a Nationalised Bank or in any other Bank approved by the Government in this behalf.Explanation. - For the purposes of this section Nationalised Bank means a Bank specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970.] [Sub-section (1) substituted by Punjab Act No. 38 of 1976.](2)[ In places where there is no such treasury, sub-treasury or bank, the municipal fund may with the previous sanction of the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] be deposited with any banker, or person acting as a banker, and who has given such security for the safe custody and repayment on demand of the fund if deposited as the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted 'Commissioner' by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] may in each case think sufficient].55. Investment of same. - [(1) A committee may, with the previous sanction of the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.], invest any portion of its municipal fund in securities of [the Central Government] [Substituted for the words 'the Government of India' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.], or invest it in such other securities or place it in such manner as the State Government may approve in this behalf, and vary such investment or placement for others of like nature.](2)The income resulting from [such] [Substituted for the words 'the' by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] securities [or placements] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] and the proceed of the sale of the same shall be credited to the municipal fund.56. Property vested in committee. (1)Subject to any special reservation made or to any special conditions imposed by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government, all property of the nature hereinafter in this section specified and situated within the municipality, shall vest in and be under the control of the committee, and with all other property which has already vested or may hereafter vest in the committee, shall be held and applied by it for the purposes of this Act, that is to say :-(a)all public town-walls, gates, markets,[stalls] [ Inserted by Punjab Act No. 12 of 1950.], slaughter-houses, manure and night-soil, depots and public buildings of every description which have been constructed or are maintained out of the municipal fund ;(b)all public streams, springs and works for the supply, storage and distribution of water for public purposes, and all bridges, buildings, engines, materials and things connected therewith or appertaining thereto, and also any adjacent land (not being private property) appertaining to any public tank of well;(c)[ all public sewers and drains, and all sewers, drains, culverts and watercourses in or under any public streets, or constructed by or for the committee alongside any public street, and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto :] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.](d)all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter or filth or rubbish of any kind or dead bodies of animals, collected by the committee from the street, houses, privies, sewers, cess-pools or elsewhere or deposited in places fixed by the committee under Section 154 ;(e)all public lamps, lamp-posts, and apparatus connected therewith or appertaining thereto :(f)all land or other property transferred to the committee by the [Government] [Substituted for the word 'Crown' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] or acquired by gift, purchase or otherwise for local public purposes;(g)[ all public streets, not being land owned by [Government] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] and the pavements, stones and other materials, thereof, and also trees growing on and erections, materials, implements and things provided for such streets.](2)Where any immovable property is transferred otherwise than by the sale by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] Government to a municipal committee for public purposes, it shall be deemed to be a condition of such transfer, unless specially provided to the contrary, that should the property be at any time resumed by Government, the compensation payable therefor shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in no case exceed the amount if any paid to the Government for the transfer, together with the cost or the present value, whichever shall be less, or any buildings erected or other works executed on the land by the municipal committee.(3)[ The committee shall maintain a register and a map of all immovable property of which it is the proprietor, or which vests in it ; or which it holds in trust for the State Government.] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1933.]57. Management of public institutions. (1)The management, control and administration of every public institution maintained out of the municipal fund, shall vest in the committee.(2)When any public institution has been placed under the direction, management and control of the committee, all property, endowments and funds belonging thereto shall be held by the committee in trust for the purposes to which such property, endowments and funds were lawfully applicable at the time when the institution was so placed :Provided that the extent of the independent authority of the committee in respect of any such institution may be prescribed by the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the (Adaptation of Laws) Order, 1950.] Government:Provided also that nothing in this section shall be held to prevent the vesting of any trust property in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890.58. Acquisition of land. - When any land, whether within or without the limits of a municipality, is required for the purposes of this Act, the [State] [Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the (Adaptation of Laws) Order, 1950.] Government may, at the request of the committee, proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and on payment by the committee of the compensation awarded under that Act, and of any other charges incurred in acquiring the land, the land shall vest in the committee.Explanation. - When any land is required for a new street or for the improvement of an existing street, the committee may proceed to acquire, in addition to the land to be occupied by the street, the land necessary for the sites of the buildings to be erected on both sides of the street and such land shall be deemed to be required for the purposes of this Act.59. Transfer to Government of property vesting in committee. - The committee may, with the sanction of the State Government transfer to [Government] [Substituted for the words 'His Majesty' by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] any property vesting in the committee under section 56 or section 57, but not so as to affect any trusts or public rights subject to which the property is held :[Provided that where a committee has passed a resolution under section 3 of the Punjab Local Authorities (Aided Schools) Act, 1959 or the State Government has taken over management of aided schools of a committee under section 5 of that Act, all rights and interests in the establishment, maintenance and management of the aforesaid schools immediately before the 1st October, 1957, including all interests in the lands, buildings, playgrounds, hostels of the said schools as also in the movable properties like furniture, books, apparatus, maps and equipment pertaining thereto shall be deemed to have been transferred to the State Government on that date and, all unspent balances in respect of grants and contributions received for the maintenance and promotion of these schools shall be deemed to have been surrendered to the State Government.] [Proviso added by Punjab Act No. 22 of 1958, schedule with effect from 1st October, 1957.]60. Saving of Act XI of 1879. - Nothing in this Act shall affect the [Local Authorities Loan Act, 1879.] [See now Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (9 of 1914).]Chapter VTaxation 61. [ Taxes which may be imposed. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] (1)Subject to any general or special orders which the [State] Government may make in this behalf, and to the rules, any committee may, from time to time for the purposes of this Act, and in the manner directed by this Act, impose in the whole or any part of the municipality any of the following taxes, namely :(a)[A tax payable by the owner of building and lands not exceeding fifteen per cent of the annual value.] [Substituted by Act No. 11 of 1994.][***] [The first proviso and the word 'further' from the second proviso omitted by Punjab Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968.]Provided [***] [The first proviso and the word 'further' from the second proviso omitted by Punjab Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968.] that in the case of lands and buildings occupied by tenants in perpeuity, the tax shall be payable by such tenants ;(b)a tax on persons practising any profession or art or carrying on any trade or calling in the municipality;[Explanation. - A [person in the service of the [Government] [Added by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1925]] or person holding an office under the State Government or the [Central Government] [Substituted for the words 'Government of India' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] or a local [or other public] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] authority shall be deemed to be practising a profession within the meaning of this sub-clause.](c)a tax payable by the owner, on all or any vehicles [other than motor vehicles] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1940.] animals used for riding, draught or burden, and dogs, when such vehicles, animals used as aforesaid, and dogs are kept within the municipality;(d)[ a tax, payable by the employer, on menial domestic servants; [Clause (d) was omitted and subsequent clauses relettered (d) and (e) respectively by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.](e)a tax, payable by the occupier of any buildings in respect of which the committee has, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 159 to 165 of this Act, undertaken the house scavenging;](ee)[ in addition to the tax imposed under clause (a), scavenging tax, payable by the occupier, on buildings and lands of such percentage of the annual value thereof as the State Government may, by notification, declare to be reasonable for providing for the collection, removal and disposal by the committee of all filth and polluted and obnoxious matter from latrines, urinals, cess-pools and for efficiently maintaining and repairing the municipal drains constructed or used for the reception or conveyance of such filth or polluted and obnoxious matters :] [Clause (ee) inserted by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.](f)[ a tax payable by persons presenting building applications to the committee: [Clause(f) was inserted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.]Provided that a committee shall not impose any tax without the previous sanction of the [State] Government when -](i)it consists of members less than three-fourths of whom have been elected; or(ii)its cash balances have, at any time within the three months preceding the date of the passing of the resolution imposing the tax, fallen below Rs. 20,000 or one-tenth of the income accrued in the previous financial year whichever amount shall be less.(2)Save as provided in the foregoing clause, with the previous sanction of the State Government any other tax which [State Legislature] [Substituted for the word 'under rules made under clause (a) of sub-sections (3) of section 80-A of the Government of India Act, a local authority may be authorized to impose by any law made by the local legislature without the previous sanction of the Governor-General' by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order 1937.] has power to impose in the State under the [Constitution] [Substituted for 'Government of India Act, 1935' by the Adaptation of Laws (Third Amendment) Order, 1951.].[(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, on and with effect from the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2006, no octroi shall be levied, except on electricity, petrol and diesel :Provided that the additional excise duty, levied in lieu of octroi on liquor under any other provision of law, shall continue to be levied:] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. No. 26 of 2006.][Provided further that on and with effect from the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2012, no octroi shall be levied on petrol and diesel.] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 2012, dated 16.7.2012.](3)[ ***] [Sub section (3) was omitted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.][Nothing in this section shall authorise the imposition of any tax which the State Legislature has no power to impose in the [State] [These words were inserted at the end of the section by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.] under the [Constitution] [Substituted for the words 'Part III of the said Act' by the Adaptation of Laws (Amendment) Order, 1951.]Provided that a committee which immediately before the commencement of [Constitution] [Substituted for the words 'Part III of the said Act' by the Adaptation of Laws (Amendment) Order, 1951.] was lawfully levying any such tax under this section as then in force, may continue to levy that tax until provision to the contrary is made by [Parliament] [Substituted for the words 'The Central Legislature' by the Adaptation of Laws (Third Amendment) Order, 1951.]][Explanation. - In this section "tax" includes any duty, cess or fee.] [Inserted by East Punjab Act No. 9 of 1949.]]62. [ Procedure to impose taxes. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.] (1)A committee may, at a special meeting pass a resolution to propose the imposition of any tax under section 61.(2)When such a resolution has been passed the committee shall publish a notice, defining the class of persons or description of property proposed to be taxed, the amount or rate of the tax to be imposed, and the system of assessment to be adopted.(3)Any inhabitant objecting to the proposed tax may, within thirty days from the publication of the said notice, submit his objection in writing to the committee; and the committee shall at a special meeting take his objection into consideration.(4)If the committee decides to amend its proposals or any of them, it shall publish amended proposals along with a notice indicating that they are modification of those previously published for objection.(5)Any objections which may within thirty days be received to the amended proposals shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed in sub-section (3).(6)When the committee has finally settled its proposals it shall, if the proposed tax falls under clauses (b) to (f) of sub-section (1) of section 61 direct that the tax be imposed, and shall forward a copy of its order to the effect through the [Deputy- Commissioner], to the State Government and if the proposed tax falls under any other provision it shall submit its proposals together with the objection if any made in connection therewith to the [Deputy Commissioner.] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933.](7)If the proposed tax falls under clause (a) sub-section (1) of section 61, the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.], after considering the objections received under sections (3) and(5)may either refuse to sanction the proposals or return them to the committee for further consideration, or sanction them without modification or with such modification not involving an increase of the amount to be imposed, as he deems fit, forwarding to the State Government a copy of the proposals and his order of sanction; and if the tax falls under sub-section (2) [***] [The word bracket and figure 'or (3)' were omitted by the Government of India Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] of section 61, the [Deputy Commissioner] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1953.] shall submit the proposals and objections with his recommendations to the State Government.(8)The State Government on receiving proposals for taxation under sub section (2) [***] [The word bracket and figure 'or (3)' were omitted by the Government of India Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] may sanction or refuse to sanction the same or return them to the committee for further consideration.(9)[***] [Sub-Section (9) was omitted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.](10)(a)When a copy of order under sub-sections (6) and (7) has been received, or(b)when a proposal has been sanctioned under sub-section (8) [***] [The word bracket and figure 'or sub-section (3)' were omitted by the Government of Indian (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937.] the State Government shall notify the imposition of the tax in accordance with such order or proposal, and shall in the notification specify a date not less than [one month] [Substituted for the words 'Three Months' by Punjab Municipal (amendment) Act, 1952 Punjab Act 23 of 1952).] from the date of notification, on which the tax shall come into force.(11)A tax leviable by the year shall come into force on the first day of January or on the first day of April or on the first day of July, or on the first day of October in any year, and if it comes into force on any other than the first day of the year by which it is leviable shall be levisble by the quarter till the first day of such year then next ensuing.(12)A notification of the imposition of a tax under this Act shall be conclusive evidence that the tax has been imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.]62A. [ Power of Government in taxation. [Added by Punjab Act No. 48 of 1953.] (1)The State Government may, by special or general order notified in the official Gazette, require a Committee to impose any tax mentioned in section 61, not already imposed are such rate and within such period as may be specified in the notification and the Committee shall thereupon act accordingly.(2)The State Government may require a Committee to modify the rate of any tax already imposed and thereupon the Committee shall modify the tax as required within such period as the State Government may direct.(3)If the Committee fails to carry out any order passed under sub-section (1) or (2) the State Government may by a suitable order notified in the official Gazette impose or modify the tax. The order so passed shall operate as if it were a resolution duly passed by the Committee as if the proposal was sanctioned in accordance with the procedure contained in section 62. Procedure for Assessing Immovable Property.]63. Preparation of assessment list. - The committee shall cause an assessment list of all buildings and lands on which any tax is imposed to be prepared, containing.-(a)the name of the street or division in which the property is situated;(b)designation of the property, either by name or by number sufficient for identification;(c)the names of the owner and occupier, if known;(d)the annual [value] [Words 'area or length of frontage on which the property is assessed' omitted by Amending Act No. 11 of 1994.]; and(e)the amount of the tax assessed thereon by the committee.64. Publication and completion of assessment list. - When the assessment list has been completed, the committee shall give public notice thereof, and of the place where the list or a copy thereof may be inspected and every person claiming to be either owner or occupier of property included in the list and any authorised agent of such person shall be at liberty to inspect the list and to make extracts therefrom without charge.65. Public notice of time fixed for revising assessment list. (1)The committee shall at the time of the publication of such assessment list give public notice of a time, not less than one month thereafter, when it will proceed to revise the valuation and assessment; and in all cases in which any property is for the first time assessed, or the assessment thereof is increased, it shall also give notice thereof to the owner or occupier of the property.(2)All objections to the valuation and assessment shall be made in writing before the time fixed in the notice, or orally or in writing at that time.66. Settlement of lists. - [(1) After the objections have been enquired into and the persons making them have been allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by authorised agents, as they may think fit, and the revision of the valuation and assessments has been completed, the amendments made in the list shall be authenticated by the signatures of atleast two members of the committee, who shall at the same time certify that no valid objection has been made to the evaluation and assessment contained in the list, except in the cases in which amendments have been entered therein and subject to such amendments as may thereafter be duly made, the tax so assessed shall be deemed to be the tax for the year commencing on the first day of April of the year in which notice was issued under section 64 or section 65 of the Act :Provided that this date will not be earlier to the date on which the building came into existence.] [Sub section (1) Substituted by Amending Act No. 11, 1994.](2)The list when amended under this section shall be deposited in the committee's office and shall there be open during office hours to all owners or occupiers of property comprised therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a public notice that it is so open shall forthwith be published.67. Further amendments of Assessment list. (1)The committee may at any time amend the list by inserting the name of any person whose name ought to have been or ought to be inserted, or by inserting any property which ought to have been or ought to be inserted, or by altering the assessment on any property which has been erroneously valued or assessed through fraud, accident or mistake, whether on the part of the committee or of the assessee, or in the case of tax payable by the occupier by a change in the tenancy, after giving notice to any person affected by the amendment, of a time, not less than one month from the date of service at which the amendment is to be made.(2)Any person interested in any such amendment may tender his objection to the committee in writing before the time, fixed in the notice or orally or in writing at that time, and shall be allowed an opportunity of being heard in support of the same in person or by authorized agent, as he may think fit.(3)[ Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Committee may with a view to give effect to the annual value as modified by the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act 11, 1994, amend the assessment list of the year commencing on the first day of April of the relevant year for increasing or reducing annual value of any property and of the assessment thereupon after giving notice at any time to any person affected by the amendment of a period not less than one month from the date of service at which the amendment is to be made and the Committee shall consider any objection made in this regard by any such person and the amended assessment list shall come into force with effect from the first day of April of the year in which notice was given to the person affected.] [Sub section (3) Added by Amending Act No. 11 of 1994.]68. [ Preparation of new assessment list. [Section fully Substituted by Amending Act No. 11 of 1994.] (1)Where the assessment of land or building has been made on the basis of the annual value as specified in clause (i) of section 3, the assessment list will be valid for a period of five years and after the expiry of the period of five years, the annual value may be determined at the option of the owner either in accordance with the method specified in sub- clause (b) of clause (i) of section 3 or by increasing it by ten per cent of the annual value already fixed.(2)In the case of land or building which is occupied by the tenant, the annual value may be revised when revision in the rent is made :Provided that where no revision in rent is made and a period of five years has elapsed since the date of the previous assessment, the annual value may be enhanced for reasons to be recorded in writing and after hearing the landlord.]68A. [ Power to amend assessment list in certain cases. [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, where the prescribed authority is satisfied that any property has been erroneously valued or assessed through fraud, accident or mistake, whether on the part of the committee or of the assessee, it may, after giving to the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making such enquiry as it may deem fit pass an order amending the assessment already made and fixing the amount of tax payable for that property and on the issue of such an order the assessment list then in force shall, subject to the order, if any, passed in appeal, be deemed to have been amended accordingly with effect from first day of January, or first day of April, or first day of July, or first day of October, next following the month in which the order is passed.(2)Any person aggrieved by an order of the prescribed authority may, within a period of thirty days of the date of communication to him of the order, file an appeal to State Government which shall decide the appeal after giving to the appellant an opportunity of being heard.]General Provisions69. Tax not invalid for defect of form. - No assessment and no charge of demand of any tax made under the authority of this Act shall be impeached or affected by reason of any mistake in the name, residence, place of business or occupation of any person liable to pay the tax, or in the description of any property or thing liable to the tax, or of any mistake in the amount of assessment or tax, or by reason of any clerical error or other defect of form; and it shall be enough in any such tax on property or any assessment of value for the purpose of any such tax if the property taxed or assessed is so described as to be generally known; and it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupier thereof.70. Power of the Committee in regard to taxes. (1)A committee may exempt, in whole or in part, for any period not exceeding one year from the payment of any such tax, any person who by reason of poverty may in its opinion be unable to pay the same, and may renew such exemption as often as may be necessary.(2)A committee, by a resolution passed at a special meeting and confirmed by the State Government, may -(a)provide that all or any persons may be allowed to compound for taxes imposed under sub-clauses (c), (d) and (e) of clause (1) and under clauses (2) and (3)] of section 61;(b)abolish, suspend or reduce in amount any tax imposed under the foregoing sections; or(c)exempt in whole or in part from the payment of any such tax, any person or class of persons or any property or description of property.71. Powers of the State Government in regard to taxes. (1)The State Government may by order exempt in whole or in part from the payment of any such tax any person or class of persons or any property description of property.If at any time it appears to the State Government on complaint made or otherwise, that any tax imposed under the foregoing sections is unfair in its incidence or that the levy thereof or of any part thereof is injurious to the interests of the general public, it may require the committee to take within a specified period measures to remove the objection : and, if within that period the requirement is not complied with to the satisfaction of the State Government the State Government may by notification suspend the levy of the tax or of such part thereof until the objection has been removed.72. Remission of tax on unoccupied immovable property. (1)When any property assessed to a tax under [sub-clause(a) of clause (1) of section 61,] [Sub-section (6) has been added for the Municipalities to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, applies.] which is payable by the year or by instalments, has remained unoccupied and unproductive of rent throughout the year or the period in respect of which any instalment is payable, the committee shall remit the amount of the tax or of the instalment, as the case may be :Provided that no such remission shall be granted unless, notice in writing of the circumstances under which it is claimed has been given to the committee within the first month after the expiry of the period in respect of which it is so claimed.(2)When any such property as aforesaid -(a)has not been occupied or productive of rent for any period of not less than sixty consecutive days, or(b)consists of separate tenements, one or more of which has or have not been occupied or productive of rent for any such period as aforesaid; or(c)is wholly or in greater part demolished or destroyed by fire or otherwise;the committee may remit such portion (if any) of the tax or instalment as it may think equitable.(3)The burden of proving the facts entitling any person to claim relief under this section shall lie upon him.(4)For the purposes of this section neither the presence of a care-taker nor the mere retention in an otherwise unoccupied dwelling house of the furniture habitually used in it shall constitute occupation of the house.(5)For the purposes of this section a house shall be deemed to be productive of rent if let to a tenant who has a continuing right of occupation thereof, whether it is actually occupied by such tenant or not.(6)[ The enquiry necessary for a decision whether any relief shall be granted under this section shall be held by the Executive Officer who shall make such recommendation to the committee as he may deem proper :Provided that the committee shall not grant any remission of tax unless such remission is recommended by the Executive Officer.] [Sub-section (6) has been added for the Municipalities to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931, applies.]73. Duty of furnishing true information regarding liability to municipal taxation. (1)Every person shall on the demand of an officer duly authorised by the committee in this behalf furnish such information as may be necessary in order to ascertain whether such person is liable to pay any municipal tax; and every hotel or lodging house keeper or secretary of a residential club shall also on demand made as aforesaid furnish a list of all persons residing in such hotel, lodging-house or club.(2)If any person so called upon to furnish such information omits to so or furnishes information which is untrue, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.(3)[ It would be obligatory for the owner to inform the committee about rent being charged from the tenant and also about the increase in the rent by filing a statement in the manner prescribed.(4)In the event of the owner not giving the information as required under sub-section (3), the owner shall be liable to pay a penalty which may extend to the amount of the tax payable on land or building under sub-section (1) of section 61 of this Act.] [Sub section (3) and (4) Added by Amending Act No. 11 of 1994.]74. Notice to be given to the committee of all transfers of title of person primarily liable to payment of property tax. (1)whenever the title to or over any building or land of any person primarily liable for the payment of property taxes on such property is transferred the transferor [and the transferee] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] shall within three months of the registration of the deed of transfer if it be registered, or if it be not registered within three months of its execution, or if no instrument be executed of the actual transfer give notice in writing of such transfer to the committee.(2)Every person primarily liable for the payment of a tax on any property, who transfers his title to or over such property, without giving notice of such transfer to the committee as aforesaid, shall, in addition to any other liability which he incurs through such neglect, continue liable for the payment of all such taxes from time to time payable in respect of the said property until he gives such notice, or until the transfer shall have been recorded in the committee's books.(3)Wherever the title to or over any building or land has developed upon any person by inheritance, the heir shall within three months of the date of the death of the former owner give notice in writing of such inheritance to the committee.(4)But nothing in this section shall be held to diminish the liability of the transferee or heir for the said taxes or to affect the prior claim of the committee for the recovery of the taxes due thereupon.(5)[ Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) shall, in addition to any other penalty which he incurs through such neglect, be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupee; and, in the case of a continuing breach, with a further fine which may extend to five rupees for every day after the first during which the breach continues.] [Sub-section (5) added to section 74, by Punjab Act No. 23 of 1952.]75. Power of entry for the purposes of valuation or taxation. - The committee may authorize any person: -(a)after giving twenty-four hours' notice to the occupier, or, if there be no occupier, to the owner, of any building or land, at any time between sunrise and sunset, to enter, inspect and measure any building for the purpose of valuation;(b)to enter and inspect any stable, coach-house or other place wherein therefore is reason to believe that there is any vehicle or animal liable to taxation under this Act or for which a licence has not been duly taken out.76. Power to examine article liable to octroi. - Every person bringing or receiving with the octroi [or terminal] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] limits of any municipality any article on which octroi or [terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1922.] is payable shall when required by an officer duly [authorized by the State Government or the Committee] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] in this behalf and so far as may be necessary for ascertaining the amount of tax chargeable: -(a)permit that officer to inspect, examine, weigh and otherwise deal with the article, and(b)communicate to that officer any information and exhibit to him any bill, invoice or document of like nature which he may possess relating to the article.77. Power to search where octroi is leviable. (1)If any person, bringing or receiving conveyance or package within the octroi or [terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] limits of a municipality on which octroi or [terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1922.] is or is believed to be leviable, shall refuse, on the demand of an officer [authorized by the State Government or the committee] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] in this behalf, to permit the officer to inspect, weigh or otherwise examine the contents of the conveyance or package for the purpose of ascertaining whether it contains any articles in respect of which octroi or [terminal tax] [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 8 of 1974.] is payable or shall refuse to communicate to the officer any information and exhibit to him any bill, invoice or document of a like nature which he may possess relating to the article, or with the intention of defrauding the committee or a lessee under section 83 shall communicate any such information which is false or exhibit any such bill, invoice or document of a like nature which is false, forged or fraudulent he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to fifty rupees.(2)Any such person may demand that the conveyance or package or both as the case may be, shall be taken without unnecessary delay before [a member of the committee or the secretary] [The Municipalities to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931. applies the words 'the Executive Officer' shall be deemed to be substituted for the words within brackets in sub-section (2) of section 77, vide item No. 7, Schedule II of Punjab Act No. 2 of 1931.] or a magistrate who shall cause the inspection to be made in his presence.(3)[ Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) in case of non-payment of any octroi on demand, the officer referred to in section 76 may seize any article on which the octroi is chargeable to satisfy the demand.] [The Municipalities to which the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931. applies the words 'the Executive Officer' shall be deemed to be substituted for the words within brackets in sub-section (2) of section 77, vide item No. 7, Schedule II of Punjab Act No. 2 of 1931.](4)The committee or an officer authorised by it in this behalf may after the lapse of five days from the seizure and after the issue of proclamation fixing the time and place of sale, cause any property so seized, or so much thereof as may be necessary to be sold by auction to satisfy the demand including the amount of penalty with the expenses occasioned by the seizure custody and sale thereof, unless the demand including the amount of penalty and expenses are in the meantime paid:Provided that by order of the officer authorised by the committee in this behalf, articles of a perishable nature which cannot be kept for five days without serious risk of damage may be sold after the lapse of such shorter time as he may, having regard to the nature of the articles, think proper]78. Power to fix octroi or terminal tax limits and penalty for evasion of octroi or terminal tax. - If [animals or articles] [Substituted for the words 'Goods' by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] passing the octroi or [terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1923.] boundary of municipality are liable to the payment of octroi [terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1923.] then every person who [-causes or abets the introduction of or himself introduces or attempts to introduce within the said octroi [or [terminal tax] [Words 'with the intention to defraud the committee or a lessee under section 83' omitted by Punjab Act No. 38 of 1976.]] boundary], any such [animals or articles] [Substituted for the words 'Goods' by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1923.] upon which payment of the octroi [or terminal tax] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1923.] due on such introduction has neither been made nor tendered, shall be punishable with fine which may extend either to [twenty] [Substituted for 'ten' by Punjab Act No. 38 of 1976.] times the value of such octroi or [terminal tax] [Words 'with the intention to defraud the committee or a lessee under section 83' omitted by Punjab Act No. 38 of 1976.] or to fifty rupees, whichever may be greater.78A. [ Extension of taxation limits by agreement. [Substituted by Punjab Act No. 3 of 1933, Section 78-A originally inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 1923.] (1)When a committee, with the sanction of the State Government has agreed with a Cantonment Authority [***] or [The committee of] [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 1 of 1937.] an area notified under section 241 that in consideration of the payment of a lump sum or otherwise the same limit for octroi or terminal tax or any toll or tax shall be established for the contracting parties, the committee may fix limits under section 188 so as to include so much of the area controlled by the said contracting parties as it may deem necessary, and shall have the powers of collecting such toll or tax or octroi or terminal tax on animals or articles brought within the such limits, and the provisions of this Act for the assessment and collection of such tax or toll or octroi or terminal tax shall apply in the same way as if the said limits were wholly comprised in the area of the municipality.(2)The total of the proceeds of such taxes or tolls made, in the joint area of the municipality and Cantonment [*] [the words 'or Small Town' omitted by Punjab Act No. 34 of 1954.] or notified area and the cost thereby incurred shall be apportioned between the municipal fund and the fund subject to the control of the Cantonment Authority [*] [The words 'or the Committee of the Small Town' omitted by ibid.] or notified area in such proportion as shall have been determined by the agreement.]78B. [ Taxation on articles exported. [Inserted by Punjab Act No. 2 of 1953.] - When terminal tax is leviable on animals or articles conveyed out of the terming tax limits the provisions of sections 76, 77, 78 and 78-A shall he deemed, so far as may be, to apply in respect of the animals or articles so conveyed.]79. Taxes when payable. - Subject to provisions of sections 62(7) and (8) and 66 any tax imposed under this chapter and payable periodically shall