# Ajit Mohan vs Legislative Assembly, National ... on 8 July, 2021
# Source: Indian Kanoon, doc_id=23436105
# Fetch query: Justice K S Puttaswamy v Union of India 2017 right to privacy

Ajit Mohan vs Legislative Assembly, National ... on 8 July, 2021 Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 SUPREME COURT 3346, AIRONLINE 2021 SC 325 Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, Dinesh Maheshwari, Sanjay Kishan Kaul REPORTABLE IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION WRIT PETITION (C) NO.1088 OF 2020 AJIT MOHAN &amp; ORS. … PETITIONERS VERSUS LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI &amp; ORS. …RESPONDENTS INDEX S. No. Contents Page No. 1. Prolegomenon 2 2. The Factual Context 10 3. The Submissions 33 (a) The Privilege Issue 35 (b) Privileges, Free Speech and Privacy 73 (c) Legislative Competence 89 4. Recent Developments 129 5. The Opinion 135 (a) On the issue of Privilege 143 (b) On Privileges &amp; Fundamental Rights 160 (c) On Legislative Competence 164 Signature Not Verified 6. Conclusion 185 Digitally signed by Charanjeet kaur 7. Postscript 187 Date: 2021.07.08 16:37:35 IST Reason: [1] JUDGMENT SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. Prolegomenon1: 1. The technological age has produced digital platforms – not like the railway platforms where trains were regulated on arrival and departure. These digital platforms can be imminently uncontrollable at times and carry their own challenges. One form of digital platforms are the intermediaries that claim to be providing a platform for exchange of ideas without any contribution of their own. It is their say that they are not responsible for all that transpires on their platform; though on complaints being made, they do remove offensive content based on their internal guidelines. The power and potentiality of these intermediaries is vast, running across borders. These are multinational corporations with large wealth and influence at their command. By the very reason of the platform they provide, their influence extends over populations across borders. Facebook is one such corporation. 2. A testament to the wide-ranging services which Facebook offers is 1 “Preface”; See A. M. Singhvi et. al., The Law of Emergency Powers – Comparative Common Law Perspectives (Springer, 2020). [2] the fact that it has about 2.85 billion monthly active users as of March, 2021.2 This is over 1/3rd of the total population of this planet. In the national context, Facebook is the most popular social media platform in India with about 270 million registered users. Such vast powers must necessarily come with responsibility. Entities like Facebook have to remain accountable to those who entrust them with such power. While Facebook has played a crucial role in enabling free speech by providing a voice to the voiceless and a means to escape state censorship, we cannot lose sight of the fact that it has simultaneously become a platform for disruptive messages, voices, and ideologies. The successful functioning of a liberal democracy can only be ensured when citizens are able to make informed decisions. Such decisions have to be made keeping in mind a plurality of perspectives and ideas. The information explosion in the digital age is capable of creating new challenges that are insidiously modulating the debate on issues where opinions can be vastly divided. Thus, while social media, on the one hand, is enhancing equal and open dialogue between citizens and policy makers; on the other hand, it has become a tool in the hands of various interest groups who have 2 Facebook, Press Release, Facebook reports 1st Quarter 2021 Results, (2021) accessible at https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/facebook-reports-first- quarter-2021-results-301279518.html. [3] recognised its disruptive potential. This results in a paradoxical outcome where extremist views are peddled into the mainstream, thereby spreading misinformation. Established independent democracies are seeing the effect of such ripples across the globe and are concerned. Election and voting processes, the very foundation of a democratic government, stand threatened by social media manipulation. This has given rise to significant debates about the increasing concentration of power in platforms like Facebook, more so as they are said to employ business models that are privacy-intrusive and attention soliciting. 3 The effect on a stable society can be cataclysmic with citizens being ‘polarized and parlayzed’ by such “debates”, dividing the society vertically. Less informed individuals might have a tendency to not verify information sourced from friends, or to treat information received from populist leaders as the gospel truth. 3. It is interesting to note that the Oxford Dictionary in 2016 chose “Post-Truth” as the word of the year. The adjective has been defined as “relating to or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less 3 UNESCO, Concept Note, Media for Democracy, Journalism and Elections in times of Misinformation, (2019) accessible at: https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/wpfd2019_concept_note_en.pdf. [4] influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief.”4 This expression has a period relevance when it came to be recognised contextually with divided debates about the 2016 US Presidential Elections and Brexit – two important events with effects beyond their territorial limits. The obfuscation of facts, abandonment of evidentiary standards in reasoning, and outright lying in the public sphere left many aghast. A lot of blame was sought to be placed at the door of social media, it being a source of this evolving contemporary phenomenon where objective truth is becoming a commodity with diminishing value. George Orwell, in his 1943 essay titled “Looking Back on the Spanish War” had expressed “…the very concept of objective truth is fading out of the world. After all, the chances are that those lies, or at any rate similar lies will pass into history”5 – the words have proved to be prophetic. 4. In the conspectus of the aforesaid, it is difficult to accept the simplistic approach adopted by Facebook - that it is merely a platform posting third party information and has no role in generating, controlling 4 Oxford Dictionary Word of the Year 2016, accessible at: https://languages.oup.com/word-of-the-year/2016/. 5 See K. Gessen, Introduction, 26, in All Art Is Propaganda: Critical Essays (G. Orwell et. al., 2008). [5] or modulating that information. The endeavour to hide behind such simplistic models have been found to be unacceptable by the UK Parliament. The House of Commons Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Select Committee in its 2018 Report had opined that this would amount to shirking of their responsibilities with respect to content regulation on their site.6 5. Serious questions have been raised about whether there is a faulty architecture of such intermediary platforms and whether the kind of free, liberal debate which they sought to encourage has itself become a casualty, defeating the very objective of providing that platform. It is too late in the day for companies like Facebook to deny that they use algorithms (which are sequences of instructions) with some human intervention to personalise content and news to target users. The algorithms select the content based on several factors including social connections, location, and past online activity of the user. These algorithms are often far from objective with biases capable of getting 6 Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee, U.K. House of Commons, Disinformation and &#x27;fake news&#x27;: Final Report, 20-44 (18/02/2019), accessible at: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmcumeds/1791/1791. pdf. [6] replicated and reinforced. The role played by Facebook is, thus, more active and not as innocuous as is often presented when dealing with third party content. 6. In fact, in the proceedings before us, it is their contention that there are times when they are at the receiving end of both groups alleging bias towards the other but then this is a sequitur to their ability to decide which content to amplify, suggest, and elevate. Internationally, Facebook has had to recognise its role in failing to prevent division and incitement of offline violence in the context of the stated ethnic cleansing in Myanmar where a crescendo of misinformation and posts, somehow missed by Facebook employees, helped fuel the violence. 7 The platform similarly apologised for its lack of serious response to evident signs of abuse of the platform in Sri Lanka, which again is stated to have stoked widespread violence in 2018 in the country and had to acknowledge its need to be regulated though the exact method is still unclear and a prerogative of law making authority. 7 Facebook admits it was used to &#x27;incite offline violence&#x27; in Myanmar , BBC (06/11/2018), accessible at: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-46105934. Joshua Brustein, Facebook Apologizes for Role in Sri Lankan Violence , Bloomberg (13/05/2020), accessible at: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-05- 12/facebook-apologizes-for-role-in-sri-lankan-violence. [7] 7. There have been endeavours in light of the aforesaid by countries like Australia, US, the UK, and the EU for ways to regulate platforms such as Facebook in an efficient manner but their efforts are still at a nascent stage as studies are undertaken to understand the dynamism of the platform and its disruptive potential. A recent example has been Australia’s effort to formulate a legislation that would require Facebook to pay publishers for using their news stories. The law was seen as a tool to regulate the platform’s unchecked influence over political discourse, society, and democracy. In response, Facebook blocked all news on its platform across the country with the result that there was some relaxation but ultimately a via media was found. The US has also seen heated debates arising from the 2016 Presidential elections with allegations of supposed interference by Russia allegedly facilitated by platforms like Facebook. Last year, the EU formulated legislative proposals namely the Digital Services Act and Digital Markets Act, setting out rules for platforms to follow.8 8 News Media and Digital Platforms Mandatory Bargaining Code Bill, 2020 was formulated by Australia; See Alex Barker, Jamie Smyth et al., Facebook bans Australian news as impact of media law is felt globally, Financial Times (18/02/2021), accessible at: https://www.ft.com/content/cec5d055-c2d1-4d5f- a392-a6343beb0b01. See also European Parliament, Social media and democracy: we need laws, not platform guidelines (10/02/2021) accessible at: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20210204STO97129/s [8] 8. We have penned down a detailed introduction to appreciate the gravity of what was debated before us in the context of Facebook’s hands off approach, who have urged that they cannot be compelled to participate in proceedings of Sub Committees formed by the Parliament or the Legislative Assemblies. The immense power that platforms like Facebook wield has stirred a debate not only in our country but across the world. The endeavour has been to draw a line between tackling hate speech and fake news on the one hand and suppressing legitimate speech which may make those in power uncomfortable, on the other. This delicate balance has thus far only been maintained by the intermediaries by being value-neutral. The significance of this is all the more in a democracy which itself rests on certain core values. This unprecedented degree of influence necessitates safeguards and caution in consonance with democratic values. Platforms and intermediaries must subserve the principal objective as a valuable tool for public good upholding democratic values. ocial-media-and-democracy-we-need-laws-not-platform-guidelines. [9] 9. The sheer population of our country makes it an important destination for Facebook. We are possibly more diverse than the whole of Europe in local culture, food, clothing, language, religion, traditions and yet have a history of what has now commonly been called ‘unity in diversity’. This cannot be disrupted at any cost or under any professed freedom by a giant like Facebook claiming ignorance or lack of any pivotal role. The factual context: 10. Delhi, the capital of our country, witnessed an unfortunate eruption of violence between 24th and 29th February, 2020 with communal riots in different parts of North-East Delhi. This caused loss of life and property and disrupted the working of civic services in Delhi. It need not be stated that like any other incident of this nature, it also took a political colour. This produced a divide in the society with people across political affiliations blaming each other. 11. In the wake of these riots, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (“the Assembly”) resolved to constitute a Committee on Peace and Harmony (“the Committee”) under the [10] chairmanship of Mr. Raghav Chadha, Member, Legislative Assembly on 02.03.2020, to inter alia “consider the factors and situations which have the potential to disturb communal harmony in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and suggest measures to eliminate such factors and deal with such situations so as to establish harmony among different religious or linguistic communities or social groups.” It is the say of the Assembly and the Committee, that it is their objective to detect what happened and formulate recommendations to ensure it does not happen again. It is appropriate to extract the Terms of Reference of the Committee dated 12.03.2020 as issued by the Assembly Secretariat as under: “LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY SECRETARIAT NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI BULLETIN PART-II (General information relating to legislative and other matters) Thursday 12th March, 2020/ 22, Phalgun, 1941 (Shaka) No.: 11 Subject: Terms of Reference of the Committee on Peace and Harmony. Hon’ble Members are hereby informed that Hon’ble Speaker has approved the following Terms of Reference for the Committee on Peace and Harmony constituted on 02.03.2020: 1. There shall be a Committee on Peace and Harmony inter-alia to [11] consider the factors and situations which have the potential to disturb communal harmony in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and suggest measures to eliminate such factors and deal with such situations so as to establish harmony among different religious or linguistic communities or social groups. 2. The Committee shall consist of nine members who shall be nominated by the Speaker. 3. The term of the Committee shall be one year. 4. The functions of the Committee shall be:- (i) to consider the petitions, complaints or reports from the members of the public, social organizations, journalists etc. on the situations prevailing in a particular area/areas which have the potential to disturb communal peace and harmony or where communal riots have occurred and to examine in detail and identify the factors responsible for it. (ii) to recommend suitable measures to defuse the situation and restore harmony among religious communities, linguistic communities or social groups. (iii) to recognise, reward and felicitate individuals who played a role in the protection of fellow citizens during acts of communal violence, or undertook any activity that led to the restoration of peace in the state. (iv) to recognize, reward and felicitate individuals whose information resulted in the registration of First Information Reports (FIRs) in relation to the crimes committed during the communal riots. (v) to undertake scientific study of the religious, linguistic and social composition of the population of NCR Delhi, with a view to identifying and strengthening the factors which unite the people despite the diversity in terms of their social, religious, economic [12] and cultural tradition. (vi) to recommend measures to be undertaken by the government towards establishing communal harmony and peace in the state. (vii) to recommend action against such persons against whom incriminating evidence is found or prima facie case is made out for incitement to violence. (viii) to examine such other matters, broadly in conformity with the objectives of the Committee, as may seem fit to the Committee or are specifically referred to it by the House or the Speaker. (ix) The Committee shall submit its report to the House. If the House is not in session the Committee may submit the report to the Speaker who may forward the same to the Govt. for necessary action thereon. The Secretary shall lay the report on the Table of the House on the first day of the next session. (x) As soon as maybe after the submission of the report to the House by the Committee, the Govt. shall take appropriate action in the matter dealt with in the report and a complete statement on the action taken by all the authorities thereon shall be laid in the House within two weeks after the report is presented in the House. (xi) In considering/examining the complaints/reports etc., the Committee may engage the services of experts. (xii) The Speaker shall reconstitute the Committee on the expiry of its term. (xiii) Except in respect of matters provided in these rules, other matters in connection with the Committee shall be dealt with under the general rules relating to the Committees. (xiv) The Speaker may issue such directions as he may consider necessary for regulating the procedure in connection with all matters involving the consideration of any question that may be [13] brought up before the Committee. (xv) The Committee shall have all the powers, privileges and immunities as are available to the Committees of the Legislative Assembly of National Capital Territory of Delhi. C. Velmurugan Secretary” (Emphasis supplied) 12. It appears that the first public meeting was held on 05.03.2020, which was attended by religious leaders, social workers and various officials from different walks of life. It is the say of the Committee that thousands of complaints were received which inter alia suggested that Facebook had been used as a platform for fomenting hate and jeopardising communal harmony. This was further fuelled by an article published in the Wall Street Journal on 14.8.2020 titled “Facebook’s Hate-Speech Rules Collide with Indian Politics” (“the Article”) suggesting that there was a broad pattern of favouritism towards the ruling party and Hindu hardliners. The Article also made serious allegations of lapses on the part of Facebook India in addressing hate speech content. 13. The aforesaid resulted in two important developments. The first [14] was that on 20.08.2020 the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Information Technology (“Parliamentary Committee”) issued a notice requesting Mr. Ajit Mohan, Petitioner No. 1 herein, Vice President and Managing Director of Petitioner No. 2 Facebook India Online Services Private Limited, to appear before the Parliamentary Committee on 02.09.2020. The notice stated that the Committee was seeking Facebook India’s views inter alia on the subject of “safeguarding citizens’ rights and prevention of misuse of social/online news media platforms including special emphasis on women security in the digital space.” The letter reads as under: “MOST IMMEDIATE LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT (STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY BRANCH) FAX: 23010756 PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE NEW DELHI-110001 No.18/1(iv)/IT/2020 20th August, 2020 From Y.M. Kandpal Director To Shri Ajit Mohan Vice President &amp; MD, Facebook India Online Services Pvt. Ltd., [15] 7th Floor, Parsvnath Capital Towers, Bhai Veer Singh Marg, Gole Market, New Delhi-110001. Subject: Examination of the subject ‘Safeguarding citizens’ rights and prevention of misuse of social/online news media platforms including special emphasis on women security in the digital space’ xxxxx Sir, I am directed to state that the Standing Committee on Information Technology are examining the subject ‘Safeguarding citizens’ rights and prevention of misuse of social/online news media platforms including special emphasis on women security in the digital space’. 2. Keeping in view the importance of the subject and its wider implications in the present context, the Committee have decided to hear the views of representatives of Facebook India on the above subject at their sitting scheduled to be held on Wednesday, 2 nd September, 2020 from 1600 hrs. onwards in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 3. It is, therefore, requested that senior most representatives of Facebook India may make it convenient to appear before the Committee on the said date, time and venue. The names/designations of the representatives from Facebook India who will appear before the Committee may be intimated to this Secretariat by 27th August, 2020 or before positively. In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, you are requested to restrict the number of representatives who will attend the scheduled sitting on 2 nd September, 2020 to a maximum of 5 persons. 4. You may like to submit a brief note highlighting your views/comments on the subject matter to the Committee before sitting. The same can be e-mailed at comit@sansad.nic.in. [16] 5. Entry passes to the venue of the sitting may be collected from the IT Committee Branch in advance. 6. A copy of the points of Conduct and Etiquette to be observed by non-official witnesses appearing before the Committee is enclosed at Annexure-I for your guidance. Yours faithfully, Sd/- Director Tel No.23034388/5235 comit@sansad.nic.in” 14. Along with the aforesaid letter was annexed as Annexure-I the Points of Conduct and Etiquette for the guidance of witnesses appearing before the Parliamentary Committees or their sub-committees, which inter alia in para 8, set out as to what would constitute breach of privilege and contempt of the Parliamentary Committee. The said Annexure reads as under: “ANNEXURE-I POINTS OF CONDUCT AND ETIQUETTE FOR THE GUIDANCE OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEES OR THEIR SUB- COMMITTEES. The witnesses should note the following points while appearing before Parliamentary Committee: 1. Due respects to the Chairman and the Committee/Sub- Committee should be shown by the witness by bowing while [17] taking his seat. 2. The witness should take the seat earmarked for him opposite to the seat of the Chairman. 3. The witness should take the oath, or make affirmation, if so asked by the Chairman. The oath or affirmation will be administered by the Secretary. The witness will take the oath or make affirmation standing in his seat and bow to the Chair just before taking the oath or making the affirmation and immediately afterwards. 4. The witness should answer specific questions put to him either by the Chairman, or by a Member of the Committee or by any other person authorized by the Chairman. The witness may be asked to place before the Committee any other points that have not been covered and which a witness thinks are essential to be placed before the Committee. 5. All submissions to the Chair and the Committee should be couched in courteous and polite language. 6. When the evidence is completed, and the witness is asked to withdraw, he should, while leaving, bow to the Chair. 7. The witness should not smoke or chew when he is seated before the Committee. 8. Subject to the provisions of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Lok Sabha, the witness should note that following acts shall constitute breaches of privilege and contempt of Committee:- (a) Refusal to answer questions. (b) Prevarication or willfully giving false evidence or suppressing the truth or misleading the Committee. (c) Trifling with the Committee; returning insulting answers. (d) Destroying or damaging a material document relative to the [18] enquiry. 9. The witness should not bring cellular phones inside the Parliament House Complex. xxxxx” 15. Mr. Ajit Mohan, Petitioner No. 1, duly appeared before the Parliamentary Committee and offered his views. 16. The second development took place on 31.08.2020 when the Chairman of the Committee held a press conference (“the press conference”) wherein he summarised the complaints received in the hearings conducted between 25.08.2020 and 31.08.2020. In this process, he stated that it prima facie appeared that Facebook had colluded with vested interests during the Delhi riots in February, 2020. Comments were also made by the Chairman to the effect that Facebook ought to be treated as a co-accused and an independent investigation should be carried out into its role in the riots. It was stated that if the investigation uncovered strong evidence against Facebook, a supplementary chargesheet should be filed in this regard (we may note here itself that the stand taken during the course of arguments was that these were not the Chairman’s own views but were merely the views expressed by the Committee). Since [19] Facebook had not been heard, it was observed in the press conference that before any action is taken in writing, Facebook should be given a chance to appear before the Committee. Consequently, notice for appearance was issued on 10.09.2020 (“First Impugned Summons”) by the Assembly to Mr. Ajit Mohan in the capacity of Vice President and Managing Director of Facebook India. The First Impugned Summons highlighted the factum of numerous complaints alleging intentional omission and deliberate inaction on the part of Facebook in tackling hate speech online. The Article was also referred to and Mr. Ajit Mohan was called upon to deliver insights to the Committee with respect to Facebook India’s internal functioning and enforcement of policies in view of the special knowledge that he possessed. It was clearly stated that he was being called as a witness for testifying on oath before the Committee on 15.09.2020. Significantly, no consequences in the form of breach of parliamentary privilege were intimated in case Mr. Ajit Mohan refused to appear. The same reads as under: “LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI OLD SECRETARIAT, DELHI 110054. Notice/Summon for Appearance No.24/3/P&amp;H/2020/LAS-VII/Leg./33 Date: 10.09.2020 [20] To, Mr. Ajit Mohan, Vice President &amp; Managing Director, India-Facebook, Address:-1 Address:-2 Facebook India Online Services Pvt. Ltd. One BKC Level-17, DLF Horizon Building, Bandra Kurla Complex Two Horizon Centre, Golf Course Road, Bandra (E) DLF Phase 5, Sector 43, Mumbai, India-400051 Gurugram, Haryana 122022 Subject: Notice for Appearance before the Delhi Legislative Assembly’s Committee on Peace and Harmony, NCT of Delhi. The Delhi Legislative Assembly’s committee on ‘Peace and Harmony’, headed by Hon’ble Member of Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi, Mr. Raghav Chadha, as its Chairman along with other Hon’ble Members of the Legislative Assembly, assisting and facilitating the state’s endeavour to maintain and promote an irenic atmosphere in the city as well as establishing a conducive milieu of concordance, peace and pacification amongst different communities residing in NCT of Delhi. Pertinently, the committee has received numerous complaints alleging inter alia intentional omission and deliberate inaction on the part of social media platform-Facebook to apply hate speech rules and Polices which has allegedly led to serious repercussions and disruption of peace and harmony across the NCT of Delhi. A few complainants have also drawn considerable strength from the news report published by The Wall Street Journal on 14.08.2020, titled as ‘Facebook’s Hate-Speech Rules Collide With Indian Politics’. The committee had promptly taken cognizance of serious allegations set out in the vetted complaints and have begun the proceedings in this regard, pursuant to which numerous witnesses have been examined. Significantly, in the wake of serious allegations leveled against [21] Facebook India unit which you have been spearheading since 2019, you, the addressee, as the Vice-President and Managing Director of Facebook India and as a representative of the same, are best suited to deliver insights to the committee with respect to Facebook India’s internal functioning and enforcement of policies, and thus, your special knowledge in this regard would be imperative for the committee while examining the current issue in hand. In view thereof, the committee, under the Chairmanship of Hon’be (sic) MLA Sh. Raghav Chadha, calls you, the addressee, as a witness for testifying on oath and for rendering your assistance by providing the relevant information and explanations in order to smoothly expedite the determination of the veracity of allegations leveled against Facebook in the complaints and depositions made before the committee. In pursuance thereof, we hereby summon you, the addressee, to appear before the committee on 15 th September, 2020 at 12 Noon at MLA Lounge-1, Delhi Vidhan Sabha, for the purpose of recording your deposition on oath and participating in the proceedings carried out by the committee. (Deputy Secretary) The Committee on Peace and Harmony NCT of Delhi PH-011-23890384 Email ID dvscommittee@delhi.gov.in” 17. One Mr. Vikram Langeh, Director of Trust and Safety, Facebook sent a reply dated 13.09.2020 emphasising that Facebook’s internal policies seek to protect user safety and security and also emphasised the different mechanisms it employs to tackle hate speech content. The factum of Facebook having given testimony before the Parliamentary [22] Committee was also set out. A plea was raised that the role of regulation of intermediaries like Facebook squarely fell within the exclusive authority of Union of India; in exercise of which the Parliament had enacted the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“the IT Act”). Not only that, the subject of law and order in the NCT of Delhi was stated to fall within the exclusive domain of the Union of India. On these pleas the First Impugned Summons was objected to and requested to be recalled. The reply reads as under: “FACEBOOK September 13, 2020 To, The Hon’ble Chairman, The Committee on Peace and Harmony, Delhi Legislative Assembly, NCT of Delhi. Subject: Response to Notice for Appearance before the Delhi Legislative Assembly’s Committee on Peace and Harmony, NCT of Delhi dated September 10, 2020 Hon’ble Chairman, Facebook India Online Services Private Limited is in receipt of the notice dated September 10, 2020 (“Notice”) issued by the Delhi Legislative Assembly’s Committee on Peace and Harmony (“Committee”). Facebook, Inc. (“Facebook”) operates and manages the Facebook platform, and provides the Facebook service to users in India. Facebook shares the Committee’s concerns regarding the dissemination of hate speech online and has implemented robust [23] measures to curb its spread on Facebook’s platforms. Facebook bans individuals and groups that proclaim a hateful and violent mission from having a presence on its platforms. Facebook seeks to apply its comprehensive standards uniformly and has identified a range of such individual and groups across the globe. Facebook has also built some of the most advanced systems in the world to protect its users’ safety and security, investing billions of dollars in technology and hiring tens of thousands of people to work on safety and security. Based on these efforts, we removed 22.5 million pieces of hate speech content in the second quarter of 2020 (up from just 1.6 million pieces of hate speech removed in the last quarter of 2017), nearly 95 percent of which we removed before it was reported to us. Facebook is committed to being more transparent about how it combats hate speech and routinely publishes a Transparency Report, which provides details about steps taken by Facebook to prevent and action content that violates its policies. In view of the importance of this subject, the Parliament’s Standing Committee on Information Technology (“Parliamentary Standing Committee”) is examining the issues raised in your Notice as a part of its inquiry into “Safeguarding citizens’ rights”. We gave testimony before the Parliamentary Standing Committee. We are enclosing the notice received from the Parliamentary Standing Committee for your reference. (Annexure A) As you are well aware, the regulation of intermediaries like Facebook falls within the exclusive authority of the Union of India and in exercise of this power to regulate “communications”, Parliament has enacted the Information Technology Act, 2000. Further, the subject of “law and order” in the National Capital Territory of Delhi also falls within the exclusive domain of the Union of India. Given that the issues raised by the Notice involve subject matter within the exclusive domain of the Union of India, and that the matters are under active consideration by Parliament, we [24] respectfully object to the Notice and request that you recall it. Facebook responds to the Notice without prejudice to, and expressly reserving, any and all of its rights. Sincerely, For Facebook Vikram Langeh Director, Trust &amp; Safety, Facebook.” 18. The aforesaid was not acceptable to the Committee, which formulated a reply to Facebook’s response on 18.09.2020, this time addressing it to both Mr. Ajit Mohan and Mr. Vikram Langeh. The three annexures enclosed with the reply were: (a) Terms of Reference of the Committee (“Terms of Reference”); (b) Sections 18 and 37 of the Government of National Capital Territory Act, 1991 (“GNCTD Act”); and (c) fresh summons issued to Mr. Ajit Mohan (“Second Impugned Summons”) under Rule 172 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi (“the Rules”). 19. The Committee’s reply alluded to its Terms of Reference to emphasise that it was in furtherance of the objective of good governance and to carry out responsibilities of the State under the Constitution. The [25] purpose, it was stated, was to invite the public to join this exploratory process, the remit of which included making suggestions to the Union Government beyond using the mechanisms of the Inter-State Council. This was stated to be in line with the principles of cooperative federalism, which encompassed a large number of areas. It is at this stage that a perceived element of threat was held out to Mr. Ajit Mohan stating that his refusal to appear was inconsistent with the law of privileges of a legislature (which extends to the Committee and its members). He was asked to appear before the Committee on 23.09.2020 in the “spirit of democratic participation and constitutional mandates.” Importantly, it was clearly stated that non-compliance would be treated as breach of privilege of the Committee and necessary action would be taken. 20. It is the aforesaid Second Impugned Summons which triggered the filing of the present proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution of India by Mr. Ajit Mohan as the first petitioner, in his capacity as the Vice President and Managing Director of Facebook India Online Services Private Limited, which is the 2nd petitioner. The third petitioner is the parent company, Facebook Inc., US. The array of respondents include the [26] Assembly as the first Respondent while Respondent Nos. 2 to 4 are the Union of India, represented through different Ministries, being Ministry of Law and Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. Respondent Nos. 5 &amp; 6 are the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha respectively. Delhi Police was impleaded as the 7 th respondent. We may note that in the course of the proceedings the Committee sought to be impleaded as a party and in terms of the consent order dated 20.01.2021 the said entity was permitted to intervene. The prayers made in the writ petition are as under: “a. Issue a writ/order or direction in the nature of Mandamus setting aside the Impugned Summonses dated September 10, 2020 and September 18, 2020; b. Issue a writ/order or direction in the nature of Prohibition restraining Respondent No.1 from taking any coercive action against Petitioners in furtherance of the Impugned Summonses; c. Issue or pass any writ, direction or order, which this Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of the case.” 21. On 23.09.2020, in the presence of the counsel of the parties, notice was issued. Dr. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate appearing for Respondent No.1, on instructions, stated that the meeting scheduled for the said date had already been deferred and no further meeting would be [27] fixed qua the petitioners till the next date of hearing. Further, on the Court’s query regarding the role of Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 (the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha respectively), Mr. Harish Salve, learned Senior Advocate appearing for Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 submitted that the only purpose of serving them was that although no relief was claimed, there was a perception that there may be some interplay of powers between the Delhi Secretariat and the Secretariat of the Central Government. 22. The aforesaid interim arrangement continued as pleadings were completed. The matter was set down for hearing with rule nisi being issued on 21.01.2021. The issue was debated before us on numerous dates thereafter and the hearing concluded on 24.02.2021. We recorded that the counsels had argued over a period of 26 hours, leaving the task to us to pen down the judgment - which we seek to perform now. 23. At this stage, we must note a significant development that arose during the course of the proceedings, possibly emanating from certain questions posed by the Court qua the press conference, the summonses issued to Petitioner No.1, and on account of certain submissions [28] advanced by learned counsel for the Petitioners. An affidavit was placed before us (as recorded in the proceedings of 04.02.2021) in terms whereof the two impugned summonses issued to Petitioner No.1 dated 10.09.2020 and 18.09.2020 stood withdrawn. A fresh notice was issued on 03.02.2021 (“The New Summons”) to Petitioner No. 2, i.e. Facebook India alone. The New Summons dated 03.02.2021 reads as under: “LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI OLD SECRETARIAT, DELHI 1100 54 Committee on Peace and Harmony No.24/3/P&amp;H/2020/LAS-VII/Leg./1305 Date: 03.02.2021 Notice/Summon for Appearance To, Facebook India Online Services Pvt Limited Address 1 One BKC, Bandra Kurla Complex Bandra (E) Mumbai, India-400051 Address 2 Level-17, DLF Horizon Building, Two Horizon Centre, Golf Course Road, DLF Phase 5, Sector 43, Gurugram, Haryana 122022 Subject: Notice for Appearance under Rule 172 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi. [29] 1. In supersession of earlier notice(s)/summons dated 10.09.2020 and 18.09.2020, the present notice for appearance is being issued. 2. I am directed to state that the National Capital Territory of Delhi had witnessed unprecedented communal disharmony and violence in February 2020. The Hon’ble Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi has constituted a Committee on Peace on (sic.) Harmony under the Chairmanship of Sh. Raghav Chadha along with other Hon’ble Members of the Legislative Assembly to recommend suitable measures to defuse the situation and restore harmony among religious communities, linguistic communities or social groups. The Committee aims to recommend preventive and remedial measures concerning issues of governance, social cohesion, unity, brotherhood and peace. The Committee further aims to recommend measures to strengthen overall social and economic development in the context of establishing communal harmony and peace in society in the NCT of Delhi. 3. Keeping in view the importance of the above subject and its implication on persons in the NCT of Delhi, various persons including journalists, former bureaucrats and community leaders have appeared before the Committee to offer their evidence and suggestions. The Committee has observed and is of the opinion that social media has a very important role in curbing the spread of false, provocative and malicious messages which can fan the violence and disharmony. 4. Since, Facebook has lakhs of users in the NCT of Delhi, in the above-stated context, the Committee has decided to hear the views of representative(s) of Facebook India on the above subject at their sitting scheduled to be held on 25th February, 2021 from 11 AM onwards in MLA Lounge-1, Assembly Complex, Old Secretariat, [30] Delhi-110054 as per the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the House. 5. It is, therefore, requested that a competent senior representative(s) of Facebook India well conversant with the issues involved may appear before the Committee on the said date, time and venue as a witness. The names/designations of the representatives from Facebook India who will appear before the Committee may be intimated to this Secretariat by 24 th February, 2021 or before positively. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, you are requested to restrict the number of representatives to a minimum. 6. Please note that failure to send a representative as summoned above, could in terms of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Legislative Assembly of NCT of Delhi lead to initiation of proceedings for breach of privilege/contempt of the Assembly. 7. In light of the abovementioned supersession, previous notice(s)/summons dated 10.09.2020 and 18.09.2020 stand withdrawn Sd/- (Sadanand Sah) Deputy Secretary PH-011-23890384 E-mail ID: dvscommittee@delhi.gov.in ” Dr. Singhvi submitted that since the legal position was being debated in the larger context, the New Summons would not make a difference, except that the specific challenge to the earlier summonses [31] would not stand as they stood withdrawn and had been substituted with the New Summons. It was Mr. Salve’s view, that this would not really be a redeeming feature and the matter still had to be debated. 24. Notably, a discordant note did arise in the stands canvassed on behalf of the Assembly by Dr. Singhvi and on behalf of the Committee by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan. In the perspective of Dr. Dhavan, the earlier summons were as good in law as the New Summons and, thus, it made no difference. Obviously, Dr. Singhvi thought otherwise, as there would have been no occasion to withdraw the earlier summons and issue a fresh summons. We say so as this is one aspect emphasised in the course of arguments in rejoinder by Mr. Salve. 25. One aspect to be noticed is that the New Summons dated 03.02.2021 has been issued by the Deputy Secretary of the Committee. Thus, on the one hand, the Committee deemed it appropriate to withdraw the earlier summons and issue a fresh one (apparently wiser after some arguments from Mr. Salve and possibly some remarks of the Court) while on the other hand as an intervening entity, peculiarly, the stand of Dr. [32] Dhavan was that this was not required to be done! On this, we say no more. The Submissions 26. In his opening arguments Mr. Salve punched hard on the issue that niceties aside, one has to consider the true intent with which the summons was issued. In short, it was his say that the objective was to file a supplementary chargesheet and rope in Facebook. To substantiate this contention, he refers to three factors, i.e. (a) Para 4 (vii) read with 4 (i) of the terms of reference of the Committee; (b) the Article and (c) the press conference dated 31.08.2020. 27. The aforesaid was in the background of what was a politically polarised issue and Mr. Salve contended that the Petitioner had no intent to become part of such a debate. The parent company (Facebook Inc.) being an intermediary based in the US, could hardly be expected to be roped into this political battle which formed the basis of the summonses that have been issued. It was emphasised that the Committee’s actions amounted to a clear and present danger of coercive action, which was in violation of Petitioner No. 1’s fundamental rights. In the process of [33] reading his note of arguments, which were more detailed with different nuances, broadly four issues were sketched out:  Does a House have a privilege to summon a person to give evidence who is not directly or indirectly part of the executive?  Do powers of privilege extend to summoning an individual and compelling them to give evidence on matters of fact or seek their opinion on any subject matter?  If there does indeed exist a privilege, how is the same to be reconciled with an individual’s right to privacy and free speech?  Is the House constrained by the subject matter which constitutes a part of the business of the House relating to its legislative functions? In light of these four issues canvassed by Mr. Salve, we propose to set out the detailed arguments and thereafter proceed with our analysis under three broad heads – (a) the privileges issue, (b) privilege, right to privacy and free speech and (c) legislative competence. Privilege Issue 28. Mr. Salve took us through the history of the notion of privilege, [34] how it emanated, and how it is to be understood in the current context. He urged that privilege is a special right enjoyed by the House as a shield in order to enable it to work without fear or interference. It owes its origination in the United Kingdom under the rubric of the constitutional role of the House of Commons (functioning as a court). This role, however, has to be appropriately adapted to the Indian Constitution where there is a sharp separation of powers. A distinction was, thus, sought to be drawn that while privileges have arisen by virtue of House of Commons being a Court (with powers such as summoning persons to its “bar”) it cannot be read into the privileges of a Parliament of a republic. It was, thus, argued that in the Indian context, parliamentary privileges are strictly restricted to legislative functions. Privileges serve the distinct purpose of safeguarding the integrity of the legislative functions against obstructions which could be caused by either members or non-members. Learned counsel sought to refer to certain judicial pronouncements in this behalf. (i) In State of Karnataka v. Union of India 9 the proceedings related to a Commission of Inquiry appointed by the Central 9 (1977) 4 SCC 608. [35] Government under the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952 against the then Chief Minister of Karnataka. The challenge was laid by the State Government which was repelled by a majority judgment of six Judges with one dissenting Judge. The most significant aspect emphasised was that the “powers” meant to be indicated in Article 194(3) are not independent but are such powers which depend upon and are necessary for the conduct of business of each House. Thus, they could not be expanded into those of the House of Commons in England for all purposes. The Constitution is sovereign or supreme and thus, the Parliament as well as each legislature of the State in India enjoys only such legislative powers as the Constitution confers upon it. A distinction was made in the role performed by the Parliament and Legislative Assembly while exercising its legislative power as against a court of justice. In taking up proceedings which are quasi judicial in cases of contempt of its authority and motions concerning its “privileges” and “immunities”, the House only seeks removal of obstructions to the due performance of its legislative functions. However, if the [36] question of jurisdiction arises as to whether a matter falls here or not, it has to be decided by the ordinary courts in appropriate proceedings.10 (ii) The next judgment relied upon is Amarinder Singh v. Special Committee, Punjab Vidhan Sabha &amp; Ors. 11 In this case, Shri Amarinder Singh, then a Member of the Punjab Vidhan Sabha was expelled for the remaining part of the 13th Vidhan Sabha on allegations of criminal misconduct relating back to his tenure as the Chief Minister of Punjab during the 12th term of the Vidhan Sabha qua alleged responsibility for improper exemption of a vacant plot of land licensed to a private party. On a challenge being laid, the Supreme Court opined in favour of Shri Amarinder Singh holding that the proper course of action for the State Government should have been to move the criminal law machinery with the filing of a complaint followed by investigation as contemplated under the Code of Criminal Procedure and thus, the Punjab Vidhan Sabha had exceeded its powers by expelling the appellant on the ground of breach of privilege when there existed 10 Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Shri Raj Narain &amp; Anr., (1975) 2 SCC 159. 11 (2010) 6 SCC 113. [37] none. The alleged improper exemption of land was only an executive act and it did not distort, obstruct, or threaten the integrity of legislative proceedings in any manner observed the Constitution Bench of five Judges. In coming to the conclusion, the scope of the powers, privileges and immunities available under Articles 105(3) and 194(3) have been discussed in paras 33 to 37. It was noticed that they were not codified by way of statute till date and, thus, the Supreme Court held that it could consider the principles and precedents relatable to the British House of Commons. This Court had adopted a similar approach towards the concept of legislative privileges to interpret Article 194(3) in Re. Special Reference 1 of 1964.12 An aspect emphasised was that there was a distinction between exercise of legislative privileges and ordinary legislative functions. In that context it was observed as under: “45. In U.P. Assembly case (supra.), this Court had also drawn a distinction between the exercise of legislative privileges and that of ordinary legislative functions in the following manner: 12 AIR 1965 SC 745. [38] &quot;70. ….There is a distinction between privilege and function, though it is not always apparent. On the whole, however, it is more convenient to reserve the term `privilege&#x27; to certain fundamental rights of each House which are generally accepted as necessary for the exercise of its constitutional functions. The distinctive mark of a privilege is its ancillary character. The privileges of Parliament are rights which are ‘absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers.’ They are enjoyed by individual Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded use of the services of its Members; and by each House for the protection of its Members and the vindication of its own authority and dignity.&quot; (iii) The next judgment relied upon is in the case of Justice (Retd.) Markandey Katju v. Lok Sabha &amp; Anr.13 Facebook, as an intermediary, was used by Justice Markandey Katju, former Judge of this Court to make a statement that Mahatma Gandhi was a British agent causing harm to India and that Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose was an agent of Japanese fascism. This naturally invoked the hackles of the Parliamentarians and a discussion took place in the Rajya Sabha. A resolution was passed unanimously with the Lok Sabha doing the same on the next day unequivocally condemning the remarks of Justice (Retd.) Katju. Letters and e- 13 (2017) 2 SCC 384. [39] mails were written questioning this methodology as he was not given an opportunity of hearing in compliance with the principles of natural justice. Since it provoked no response, these resolutions were sought to be assailed by Justice (Retd.) Katju in judicial proceedings before this Court. Since no aspect of privilege was invoked and it was an expression of the views of the Parliament falling within the domain of freedom of speech in Parliament, the petition was rejected. It is in that context that a distinction was made between the exercise of contempt or breach of privilege where action was sought to be initiated against a citizen,-whether a member or a non-member. The law has developed that the action of such citizen must have interfered with fundamental functioning of the House so as to enable the House to initiate any proceedings against the citizen. The earlier judgments inter alia in the case of MSM Sharma v. Dr. Shree Sri Krishna Sinha14, Raja Ram Pal15, 16 Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 and Amarinder Singh17 were discussed to conclude that Chapter 20 of the Lok Sabha Rules 14 AIR 1960 SC 1186. 15 (2007) 3 SCC 184. 16 Supra note 12. 17 Supra note 11. [40] entitled privileges and Rules 222 to 228 thereof deal with matters of privileges. Similarly Rules 187 to 203 of the Rajya Sabha Rules deal with issues concerning privileges. Thus, an inquiry would be along the lines submitted by the petitioner only if such a privilege action was proposed to be taken which was not so in that case. In the conspectus of the aforesaid legal principles, it was urged that the petitioners in the instant case being non-members could only be summoned if they had intruded upon any functions of the Assembly. Their non-appearance or unwillingness to participate in the debate in which they were compelled to participate did not in any manner disrupt the functioning of the Committee so as to face the consequences of breach of privilege. The Committee could always make its recommendations but the petitioners do not want to be part of it. There were no legislative functions to be performed and thus, the contention was that this was a case of expanding unbridled privileges in the garb of an amorphous set of rules to make an exception to the rule of law. As such, it was argued that the Terms of Reference had to be given a restrictive meaning. [41] 29. Next, Mr. Salve sought to deal with the issue of judicial scrutiny of proceedings of the Assembly by seeking to canvas that there is no absolute bar on Courts to look into the validity of the proceedings of the Assembly. In the context of Article 212 of the Constitution read with relevant sections of the GNCTD Act, if proceedings adopted by the Assembly suffer from lack of jurisdiction or are illegal or unconstitutional, a challenge can be made before the competent court. Learned senior counsel relied upon judicial pronouncements in Special Reference No.1 of 196418, Raja Ram Pal v. Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha &amp; Ors.19 and Kalpana Mehta And Ors. vs Union of India And Ors.20 30. In Special Reference No.1 of 196421 the dispute arose out of a conflict between the legislature and the judiciary, if one may say so, as a consequence of the power exercised by the U.P. Assembly in sentencing one Keshav Singh to be detained in a civil prison for a period of 7 days and the judiciary (Allahabad High Court) enlarging him on bail thereafter. This was taken as an affront by the legislature, which passed a 18 Supra note 12. 19 Supra note 15. 20 (2018) 7 SCC 1. 21 Supra note 12. [42] resolution against the two concerned judges to be brought in custody before the House. A Full Bench of 28 judges consisting of the strength of the Court thereafter assembled to deal with the petitions filed by the two judges against this resolution. The bench restrained the Speaker from issuing a warrant against the judges and the Marshal of the House from executing the warrant. In order to resolve this confrontation, the President of India decided to exercise the power to make a reference to this Court under Art. 143(1) of the Constitution. The reference was on the important question of the exercise of powers, privileges and immunities of the State legislature vis-à-vis the power of the High Court and the Judges to discharge their duties. Suffice to say that the opinion rendered by the Court in the reference was that the powers conferred on the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution and the authority of the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution are not subject to any restrictions. It could not be said that a citizen cannot move the High Court or the Supreme Court to invoke its jurisdiction, even in cases where fundamental rights have been violated. Once the judiciary was authorized to consider the validity of the actions of the legislature, it was opined that the judiciary cannot be prevented from scrutinizing the [43] validity of the actions of the legislatures trespassing on the fundamental rights conferred on the citizens. 31. In Raja Ram Pal22 a private channel’s telecast based on a sting operation in the “cash for query case” where 10 Members of Parliament accepted money through middlemen to raise certain questions in the House resulted in an inquiry and subsequent expulsion of these members from the House. The members challenged the said expulsion. The three questions framed by the Supreme Court were all answered in the affirmative – (i) that the Supreme Court within our constitutional scheme has the jurisdiction to decide the content and scope of powers, privileges and immunities of the legislature and its members; (ii) the power and privileges of the legislature in India, in particular reference to Article 105 of the Constitution, includes the power of expulsion of its members; and (iii) in case of expulsion, the Supreme Court had jurisdiction to interfere to exercise such power and privileges. While rejecting the plea on expulsion, the Court expounded on the scope of such judicial review. Significantly, it was opined that though there would be a presumption that the Parliament would always perform its functions and exercise its 22 Supra note 15. [44] powers within a reasonable manner, there could be no scope for a general rule that the exercise of power by the legislature was not amenable to judicial review. This would neither be in the letter nor the spirit of the Constitution. The touchstone, however, would not be that of an ordinary administrative action but the legislature could not be said to have the licence even to commit a jurisdictional error. 32. In Kalpana Mehta and Ors.23 a vaccination drive conducted by NGOs without the vaccine going through all the pre-requisite trials caused loss of life, resulting in a parliamentary standing committee being constituted to inquire into the matter. The report of the standing committee was sought to be relied on in a Public Interest Litigation dealing with the issue. The question which arose was whether such a report of a standing committee could be relied upon in the judicial review. The relevant observations for our purposes are the summary of conclusions which deal with the judicial review of such legislative action. It was opined that constitutional courts are not prevented from scrutinising the validity of the actions of the legislature trespassing on the fundamental rights conferred on the citizens. There could, thus, be no 23 Supra note 20. [45] immunity to parliamentary proceedings under Article 105(3) of the Constitution though it was subject to the restriction contained in other constitutional provisions such as Article 122 or Article 212. The prohibition on the jurisdiction of the Court was restricted to the ground of irregularity of procedure but if the proceedings are tainted on account of substantive or gross illegality or unconstitutionality, there would be no protection against judicial scrutiny. 33. Finally, on the issue of privileges, Mr. Salve referred to the prevalent position in some other countries regarding the exercise of privilege powers. It was contended that such privilege powers could not be used to compel speech, more so when the organisation in question is an American corporation. We may notice at this stage itself that we really do not appreciate the second limb of this submission. When these corporations are working within the territory of our country and are subject to the jurisdiction of this Court, then what kind of special privilege would they have by reason of being an American corporation or a corporation incorporated in any other country! Now turning to the two enactments sought to be referred to by learned senior counsel – the first one is the Scotland Act, 1998, more specifically Section 23 and the [46] Government of Wales Act, 2006, more specifically Section 37. We reproduce the relevant provisions as under: “Section 23 of the Scotland Act, 1998: 23. Power to call for witnesses and documents (1)The Parliament may require any person— (a)to attend its proceedings for the purpose of giving evidence, or (b)to produce documents in his custody or under his control, concerning any subject for which any member of the Scottish Executive has general responsibility. […]” “Section 37 of the Government of Wales Act, 2006 37. Power to call (1) Subject as follows, the Assembly may require any person— (a) to attend Assembly proceedings for the purpose of giving evidence, or (b) to produce for the purposes of the Assembly (or a committee of the Assembly or a sub-committee of such a committee) documents in the possession, or under the control, of the person, concerning any matter relevant to the exercise by the Welsh Ministers of any of their functions. […]” [47] 34. In the context of the aforesaid provisions, emphasis was laid on the expression “may” to submit that there is no element of compulsion. The second aspect emphasised was that, as these legislations suggest, privilege should relate to matters in connection with functions of the ministers. This in turn was sought to be linked with the argument that what the Committee was seeking to perform was not a core function of the Assembly and thus, cannot be said to be their function. Further, if only an opinion was being sought, as had been urged by the respondents, then it was submitted that oath could only be on a question of fact and not a matter of opinion. 35. Learned senior counsel also assailed the intent of the New Summons as only a subterfuge. Compelling experts to give an opinion in a democratic polity, it was argued, would be an “abhorrent proposition” as it could only be a voluntary act. As such, the act of Assembly it was stated, reeked of constitutional arrogance. In fact, what senior counsel sought to stress was that his submission was not challenging the exercise of privilege power but the very existence of the same. In this behalf it was stressed that the Assembly (the Committee being only a smaller group constituted) would have to reconcile with where their powers to [48] summon originate from. Entry 39 of List II (Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assemblies) could not be a source of power of the Assembly and the scenario was rather of a statutory source of power emanating from Section 18 of the GNCTD Act, which was enacted in pursuance of Article 239AA (3)(a) and (3)(b) of the Constitution. Thus, a distinction was sought to be made between a power directly emanating from the Constitution and one flowing from a statutory provision. In the given facts, this was a case of the latter, which, it was urged would necessarily have to be tested on the touchstone of Part III of the Constitution. The relevant provisions are extracted hereinunder to appreciate the controversy: “Article 239AA (3)(a) and (3)(b) 239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.— xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx (3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to Union territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18. [49] (b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or any part thereof.” …. …. …. …. …. …. “Section 18 of the GNCTD Act 18. Powers, privileges, etc., of members.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislative Assembly. (2) No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any committee thereof and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees. (4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Assembly.” 36. We may clarify at this stage that since the submissions were drawn in the context of certain questions raised, this latter submission really arises in the context of privilege powers vis-à-vis the constitutional [50] provisions under Part III of the Constitution which are to be considered under a separate section. 37. It appears that the petitioners wanted to avail of the benefit of another senior counsel, possibly to further buttress their submissions and thus, Mr. Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel sought to address us next, on behalf of Petitioner No. 3, Facebook Inc. 38. Mr. Datar, in an endeavour to trace out the constitutional history, referred to the origin of powers and privileges by inviting our attention to Section 71 of the Government of India Act, 1935. It was stressed that the provincial legislatures had no powers but only privileges; they did not have powers to punish people under that Act. Next, in the context of Erskine May’s seminal commentary on Parliamentary Practices, it was pointed out that Chapter XI deals with powers and Chapter XII deals with privileges and immunities which are used interchangeably. 24 Power, however, remains, distinct. The primary power given to the House was to make laws or legislative powers. It is these powers from the Act of 1935, which are stated to have been adopted under Article 194(3) of the 24 Erskine May’s Treatise on the law, privileges, proceedings, and usage of Parliament, (Sir David Natzler, 25th Edition, 2019). [51] Indian Constitution, which applies to the State Government and every State Assembly. 39. Learned senior counsel submitted that Delhi is different as it is on a special footing being categorised as a Union Territory in Article 239AA of the Constitution. Reiterating Mr. Salve’s argument, Mr. Datar stressed that the powers and privileges conferred on the Delhi Assembly are not derived from the Constitution but by reason of statutory enactments, i.e., Section 18 of the GNCTD Act. The privilege and powers of the Assembly are, thus, undoubtedly to be tested against Part III of the Constitution. These being statutory in nature, the aspect of constitutional balancing of powers with fundamental rights, as arose in In Special 25 Reference No.1 of 1964 and MSM Sharma26 does not arise in the present case. The privilege here is a “derivative” from an Act of Parliament and not from any Constitutional provision. 40. We now turn to the submissions of the respondents on this issue, which were as vehemently argued. Dr. Singhvi, learned senior counsel 25 Supra note 12. 26 Supra note 14. [52] seeking to address submissions on behalf of the Assembly, sketched out the contours of his submissions as under: (i) The occasion to argue privilege has not even arisen and was premature as there was no actual notice of privilege. There was, thus, no factual matrix before the Court to analyse the exercise of the power and what was being sought by the petitioners qua the aspect of privilege amounted to seeking an advance ruling on the issue. (ii) Were the arguments of the petitioners to be accepted, it would have wide ramifications on the working of the committees across the nation both at the State as well as the Parliamentary levels. The argument of the petitioners, it was urged, had the propensity to destroy the system of committees which had been found historically to do yeoman work, possibly away from the more aggressive stances in the Parliament. (iii) The petitioners could not be conferred with the privilege to appear before the kind of committees they want to appear before. The petitioners admittedly had appeared on more than one occasion of a similar nature without any qualms. [53] (iv) In the similar vein, the reference to the IT Act was premature as the Assembly was not debating any legislation of the issue but only discussing a particular aspect. (v) Arguments of the petitioners were premised on lack of mutual respect and difference between the organs of our democracy. (vi) Committee proceedings are House proceedings and the Supreme Court would normally never interfere with House proceedings and therefore also not with committee proceedings. 41. The obvious political divergence between Central Government and the State Government came out quite openly during the arguments where Dr. Singhvi sought to put forth the argument that the bold stand of the petitioners stood on a support base from the Central Government. The appearance before the Parliamentary Committee was sought to be justified by the petitioners as being based on commercial and operational reasons and not in view of any compulsion (an aspect disputed by learned Solicitor General on behalf of the Central Government). The petitioners, it was argued, were actually canvassing a case on absence of any commercial and operational consequences/compulsions rather than lack of jurisdiction. It was, however, fairly assured and rightly so, that the [54] Assembly and the Committee were not oblivious to the constitutional exclusion of entries 1, 2 and 18 of List II and the respondent would never contend to encroach upon this constitutional demarcation. One aspect which Dr. Singhvi sought to emphasise, in our view not very convincingly, was that the issue of the press conference was an afterthought, raised by the petitioners to create prejudice. We say so as the press conference being held is not in doubt nor what transpired there. The only turn which Dr. Singhvi could seek to give to this is that what the Chairman of the Committee mentioned in the press conference were views of the persons who had deposed and not his own view per se. To say the least, we find this submission very difficult to accept and we will deal with it at the relevant stage. 42. The other aspect which Dr. Singhvi pointed out was the withdrawal of the Second Impugned Summons and the New Summons being issued, which no longer compelled Petitioner No.1 to appear before the Committee. However, this aspect has been labeled as a “subterfuge” by Mr. Salve, on account of the divergent views taken on the aspect of withdrawal by Dr. Singhvi and Dr. Dhavan– and surprisingly so. [55] Consequently Dr. Singhvi will have to bear the burden of the cross for the same. 43. On the specific plea of privilege Dr. Singhvi commenced by seeking to establish that all committees of legislatures have the power to summon and compel attendance. Any power, without subsidiary powers to ensure implementation, it was urged, was akin to having no power at all. The power to compel attendance by initiating privilege proceedings is therefore, an essential power. The argument was further supplemented with the contention that the power of privileges was amorphous in common law and the Parliament has consciously not codified this area of law so that they can cater to unimagined situations in the future. 44. Dr. Singhvi, in fact, cautioned that this Court should not embark on the path suggested by Mr. Salve, who had argued that it was time that these privileges were codified. Dr. Singhvi urged this Court to not even opine on the necessity of codifying such privileges and that the same should be left to the Parliament, if they so desire without any nudge by this Court. [56] 45. Dr. Singhvi sought to erase the distinction between the exercise of privilege powers under the Constitution and under the GNCTD Act by putting them on the same pedestal, urging that the two together provide for the scheme of operation. Learned senior counsel referred to provisions (7)(a) &amp; (b) of Article 239AA in the context that the GNCTD Act was not to be deemed to be an amendment to the Constitution for purposes of Article 368 of the Constitution notwithstanding that it may contain any provision which amends or has the effect of amending the Constitution. The Assembly was, thus, submitted to be a privileged body with members enjoying freedom of speech in the House as well as freedom to vote and had all the privileges (under Section 18 of the GNCTD Act) as are enjoyed by Members of Parliament. It was thus urged that calling into question the proceedings of the Committee amounted to calling into question the proceedings of the Assembly in a court of law for which the powers were not vested. The regulation of the procedure of conduct of business was not subject to jurisdiction of the courts. In order to establish parity of the privilege powers, Dr. Singhvi drew the attention of the Court to Article 105 of the Constitution, Section 18 of the GNCTD Act coupled with Rule 172 of the Rules. [57] 46. On this aspect, parity was sought to be drawn by relying on Parliamentary privileges in Entry 74 of List I and that of the Legislative Assembly in Entry 39 of List II which were stated to be pari materia. Delhi was no different, it was submitted, and thus the powers of the Assembly are the same under entry 39 of List II as any other Assembly in the context of Article 239AA of the Constitution. To further amplify this aspect, learned counsel sought to draw strength from the observations of this Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India and Anr. 27 which comprehensively dealt with the segregation of powers between the State and the Central Government in view of an ongoing conflict on various issues in this behalf. It was opined by this Court that all entries in List II will have full play except three specific entries which were excluded, i.e. entries 1, 2 &amp; 18. 47. In view of Article 239AA(3)(a) the power to summon and compel attendance was stated to be akin to that of any other legislative assembly. Testimonies before committees were stated to be mostly under oath and the rationale for the same was that the process was solemn in nature and that it would improve the quality of debate. There was stated to be no 27 (2018) 8 SCC 501. [58] competing entry in List I and the question of repugnancy would only arise in terms of any entry in List III where there are central statutes in a given scenario. The committees of legislatures all over the country (including Delhi), thus, possess the power to compel attendance of witnesses as a part of their constitutionally recognized powers and privileges and there could be no distinction based on the kind of committee or the type of person who is summoned in exercise of these powers. 48. We may note another submission of Dr. Singhvi where he cautioned the court against ruling in a manner wished for by the petitioners on account of its wider ramifications especially in the context of observations made in Kalpana Mehta And Ors.28on the importance of committees. Any hampering of the working of the committee would hamper the working of the Assembly as passing laws is not the only function of the Assembly. Thus, the practice of passing resolutions by Assemblies on the sense of the house would be disrupted. On the significance of the working of these committees, it is not necessary to go into depth as the issue has been well considered in Kalpana Mehta And 28 Supra note 20. [59] Ors.29 We, thus, consider it appropriate to only extract some of the relevant paragraphs: 66. Woodrow Wilson, the 28th President of the United States, was quoted as saying in 1885 that “it is not far from the truth to say that Congress in session is Congress on public exhibition, whilst Congress in its Committee rooms is Congress at work.” This is because most of the work of Congress was referred to committees for detailed review to inform debate on the floor of the House.” …. …. …. …. …. …. “70. The importance of Committees in today&#x27;s democracy has further been detailed thus: “Committees may not be of much service in the more spectacular aspect of these democratic institutions, and they might not be of much use in shaping fundamental policy, or laying down basic principles of government. But they are absolutely indispensable for the detailed work of supervision and control of the administration. Not infrequently, do they carry out great pieces of constructive legislation of public economy. Investigation of a complicated social problem, prior to legislation, maybe and is frequently carried out by such legislative committees, the value of whose service cannot be exaggerated. They are useful for obtaining expert advice when the problem is a technical one involving several branches within an organization, or when experts are required to advise upon a highly technical problem definable within narrow limits. The provision of advice based on an inquiry involving the examination of witnesses is also a task suitable for a committee. The employment of small committees, chosen from the members of the House, for dealing with some of the items of the business of the House is not only convenience but is also in accordance with the established convention of Parliament. This procedure is particularly helpful in dealing with matters which, because of their 29 Supra note 20. [60] special or technical nature, are better considered in detail by a committee of House. Besides expediting legislative business, committees serve other useful services. Service on these committees keeps the members adequately supplied with information, deepens their insight into affairs and steady their judgment, providing invaluable training to aspirants to office, and the general level of knowledge and ability in the legislature rises. Committees properly attuned to the spirit and forms parliamentary government can serve the country well as the eyes and ears and to some extent the brain of the legislature, the more so since the functions and fields of interest of the government increase day by day.” 49. Dr. Singhvi concluded by emphasising that not a single judicial precedent had been cited from our country or outside where the Court had intervened at the stage of summoning of a witness by the legislature (sub-committee). Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Madras High Court in C. Subramaniam v. The Speaker, Madras Legislative Assembly.30 In this case, on a speech being made by a former Member of the Madras Assembly a show-cause notice was issued by the Speaker of the Assembly as to why his conduct should not be treated as a breach of privilege. The endeavour to assail the notice was rejected by the Full Bench of the High Court, on the short ground that it was premature at that stage as no action had been taken. It was held to be akin to a writ of 30 AIR 1969 Mad 10. [61] prohibition restraining the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly from proceeding further, which was virtually on the ground of absence of an ab initio jurisdiction. It was further opined that the power vested under Article 194(3) of the Constitution empowered the Speaker with the right to call upon a third party like the writ petitioner to show cause against an alleged breach of privilege by way of contempt. In the facts of the present case, it was urged, even a show cause notice had not been issued as the Petitioner had only been called upon to depose. Thus, there was not even an initiation of any privilege proceedings. 50. We now turn to the arguments of Dr. Rajeev Dhavan on behalf of the Committee which sought to intervene in the present proceedings. We may note at the threshold that the Committee is really a creation of the Assembly, but it appears that like the petitioners, the respondents wanted assistance of more than one counsel in the belief that it would further advance their case. In the process, as noticed above, some contradiction of stand came into being regarding the implication of the issuance of the New Summons and withdrawal of the old one. [62] 51. Dr. Dhavan laid great emphasis on the main functions of the Committee as enunciated, taking a cue from its very description as a “Peace and Harmony Committee.” The main functions, thus, were to consider viewpoints across society about prevalence of such a situation which had the potential to disturb communal peace and harmony or where communal riots had occurred and to examine in detail and identify the factors responsible for it. This was coupled with the mandate to undertake scientific study on religious, linguistic, and social compositions of the population of Delhi NCR, with a view to identify and strengthen the factors which unite people despite their diversity. The Committee also sought to recommend measures to be undertaken by the government towards establishing communal harmony and peace in the State. We may note with some trepidation Dr. Dhavan’s submissions while seeking intervention that even if a writ was issued to the Assembly it could not be deemed to have been issued to the Committee because the Committee was an autonomous body which would eventually report to the Assembly and thus, enjoys a separate legal existence. Suffice for us to say at this stage that if the Committee is the creation of the Assembly and seeks to derive its powers and strength from the Assembly, it is [63] surprising to note a submission that the -Committee would not be bound by a direction of this Court if it was not specifically made a party. Be that as it may, we did permit the Committee to intervene and to that extent there was no objection from Mr. Salve. 52. The initial rebuttal to the challenge is based on the anticipatory nature of the proceedings, being presumptive and pre-emptive. There are several stages of scrutiny before a breach of privilege notice is even issued; much less any conviction arising from such a breach of privilege. 53. It was further contended that no factual basis had been laid for the concerns regarding the First and Second Impugned Summons and the press conference. Fundamental rights could not be said to be violated by a mere issuance of summons. There was stated to be lack of specificity of any claim of mala fides which could not be general in character but must be specifically pleaded and proved by all material particulars in relation to the persons concerned.31 This was an aspect absent in the present case. Dr. Dhavan categorised the writ petition as a SLAPP (Strategic Lawsuit 31 State of Madhya Pradesh v. Nandlal Jaiswal (1986) 4 SCC 566; K. Nagraj v. State of Andhra Pradesh (1985) 1 SCC 523. [64] Against Public Participation), engineered to silence the Committee and interfere with the democratic process. 54. Dr. Dhavan clarified the statements made by Mr. Raghav Chadha during the press conference on 31.08.2020 to contend that it was merely a summary of the complaints received by the Committee. They were stated not to represent the Chairman’s views, the Committee’s conclusions or the scope of the Committee’s functions. The Committee had not suo moto decided that the petitioners were responsible for causing disharmony. It had received complaints from several different people, who specifically attributed the disharmony caused by the riots in Delhi to Facebook. The statements made in the press conference were, thus, not made in bad faith and were simply repetitions of the depositions made to the effect that Facebook may have had a role in the riots. 55. The contention on the Committee’s Terms of Reference recommending criminal action was stated to be “toothless.” Thus, in a sense what was conceded was that the said part of the Committee’s Terms of Reference (i.e. in paragraph 4(vii)) was “otiose.” The Committee could, at best, make recommendations. Whether criminal action was, in [65] fact, initiated was entirely the remit of the police or the judiciary and in that context no real threat was made to the petitioners either by the Terms of Reference or by the impromptu statements made by the Chairman in the press conference. 56. The aforesaid submissions, in our view, may have mollified the petitioners though apparently not Mr. Salve. As per his submissions, all the aspects would have to be read together to come to a conclusion whether the petitioners had a real concern to approach the Court or not. We say so in the context of the Terms of Reference which included recommending criminal action, the utterances of Mr. Raghav Chadha in the press conference (undoubtedly in the background of the depositions before the Committee) and the limitation on the legislative domain by carving out of certain entries from List II as applicable to the Assembly. We will pen down our view on this aspect at a later stage. 57. We now come to arguments of Dr. Dhavan that were in sync with what Dr. Singhvi had argued, i.e., in view of the judicial observations, these committees are the eyes and ears of the Parliament, essential for the democratic polity. The functions performed by the committees are part [66] of the core legislative functions of State Assemblies, which may include (a) supervising administration, (b) taking evidence on legislation, and (c) dealing with a crisis or governance generally. In that context, Dr. Dhavan pointed out that the petitioners had not challenged the constitution of the Committee itself or its Terms of Reference. The petitioners had also not challenged the summons issued by the Parliament despite Parliament’s threat to initiate breach of privilege proceedings in case they refused to appear. As such, Facebook could not be said to have any issues while appearing before the Parliamentary Committee. The role of intermediaries in governance was relevant and the testimony of the petitioners was important in that context. The refusal was sought to be labeled down as one relating to “political reasons.” 58. Dr. Dhavan then turned to the aspect of the distinction drawn by Dr. Singhvi between members and non-members in the context of the legislature’s power to summon witnesses or initiate breach of privilege proceedings. He canvassed that no rule existed as per which non- members have the power to refuse a summons issued by a legislative committee. The core function of the legislature is democracy and not just to legislate, an aspect we agree with. Thus, it was the obligation of every [67] person to cooperate with the legislature and appear when requested to assist in the realisation of this core function. There were several ways in which the legislature may seek democratic participation, one example was appearance before committees. 59. In support of the aforesaid plea, Dr. Dhavan illustrated the proposition by giving instances of notices issued to non-members which also form a subject matter of a treatise by Dr. Dhavan “Only the Good News: On the Law of the Press in India” published in 1987. “- Thaniram (1975), (1975) XX P.D. (No.2) 49 (Kerala Legislative Assembly) – Reprimand to person who questioned the partiality of Speaker. - Satyayug (1977), (1977) XXII P.D. (No.1) 18 (West Bengal) – The West Bengal Legislature was maligned and the feature writer did not apologise but the editor did. - Udayavani (1978), (1977) XXII P.D. (No.2) 47 (Karnataka) – An unrepentant editor of a newspaper reprimanded by the Legislature for accusations of harassing educational institutions. - Nagrik (1978), (1981) XXVI P.D. (No.1) 19 (Tripura) – An editor, who criticized the alleged leak of a budget by the Chief Minister, subject to imprisonment for a day. - Varsha Joshi and K.W. Deson (1982), (1982) XXVII P.D. (No.1) (Gujarat) – The threat to institute legal proceedings against a speaker for allowing discussion on sub [68] judice matters caused the Committee to recommend imprisonment of a person.” 60. On the constitutional status of the Assembly, Dr. Dhavan sought to make a distinction between all Union Territories on the one hand, and Delhi and Puducherry on the other. A second distinction was made between the Delhi and the Puducherry Legislative Assemblies. The significant distinction was stated to be that while the Puducherry Legislative Assembly was empowered by Article 239A, the Delhi Legislative Assembly was created through an exercise of constituent power by the 69th Amendment Act, 1991. Thus, while Article 239AA excluded police power and public order from the scope of the Assembly’s competence, that did not detract from it being a full-fledged working Legislative Assembly similar to the Parliament. This aspect was stated to be reinforced by Sections 33 to 37 of the GNCTD Act. In Dr. Dhavan’s view, the powers of privilege of the Assembly could be traced to Article 239AA(2) &amp; (7) of the Constitution, Section 18(3) of the GNCTD Act and Rules 160 and 172(4) of the Rules. Dr. Dhavan drew strength from Article 212(1) to canvas that the Constitution grants internal autonomy to [69] each House of the State legislature and the validity of any proceedings cannot be questioned on an allegation of “irregularity of procedure.”32 There were conceded to be limitations to Article 212(1) of the Constitution and this Court had held that interference with the internal functioning of the State Legislative Assemblies can only be limited to cases of “gross illegality and unconstitutionality.” 33 No such illegality having occurred in this case and only a summons being issued, no proceedings for breach of privilege had been initiated and no question had been asked. As such there was no occasion whatsoever to call for interference by this Court. 61. Akin to Dr. Singhvi’s submission, Dr. Dhavan also emphasised on the sui generis nature of parliamentary powers and privileges and vehemently opposed the suggestion that these privileges needed to be codified. The powers and privileges of the legislature do not require a law and learned senior counsel sought to repel the argument of Mr. Salve that the amorphous nature of privileges offends the law and due process. It would not amount to claiming privilege as they want, as the Supreme Court has recognized a “Lakshman Rekha” to confine the extent and 32 Supra note 14. 33 Supra notes 12 and 15. [70] exercise of their powers.34 There could be many other legal concepts that are similarly amorphous or in HLA Hart’s language “open textured.” This would not amount to ipso facto undermining the credibility of these concepts or reducing the importance of the meaning given to them by the Supreme Court. Thus, at this stage, the only question was whether a simpliciter issuance of summons from a sub-committee was constitutionally improper to which the answer should be in the negative. 62. The last set of arguments on this point by Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India, were in a limited contour. He supported learned counsel for the respondents on the power of the Parliament and Assemblies per se to summon but that would be subject to judicial review. However, his next submission was in sync with the submission of the petitioners that the Assembly lacks legislative competence to deal with the subject matter in question. That being his submission, it was felt that a complete argument on privilege was not required to be considered. In substance, his contention was that the summonses could not have been issued because of lack of legislative competence but if the Assembly had the legislative competence, then the 34 Supra note 12. [71] principles as enunciated by learned counsel for the respondents were the correct principles. Privileges, Free Speech and Privacy 63. We have dealt with the aspect of rival contentions arising from the privilege of the House to summon a person, to compel them to give evidence on matters of fact, and seek their opinion – which are the first two questions framed by Mr. Salve under the head of privileges as aforesaid. Having done so, we proceed to the third question dealing with the interesting aspect of privileges vis-à-vis an individual’s right to privacy and free speech. 64. We may at the threshold note that Mr. Salve had to deal with the aspect raised by the respondents on the petition being premature – both in the context of privilege per se and in the interaction between privileges and fundamental rights. 65. Mr. Salve strongly refuted the plea of the petition being premature on the basis of the summonses issued by the Committee where it was threatened that “necessary action” would be taken against the petitioners for breach of privilege if they do not appear. He submitted that even a [72] threatened breach of fundamental rights is sufficient to invoke jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution.35 Further elucidating on this aspect, Mr. Salve submitted that access to justice is a human right available where there is even a threat to personal liberties. 36 In that context, he stated that the Second Impugned Summons left no room for doubt that Respondent No. 2 was determined that the failure to appear would constitute a breach of privilege for which “necessary action” will be taken, which included the risk of arrest and imprisonment. This argument arose from the plea of Mr. Salve that the petitioner had a right to not appear and in the alternative a right to remain silent if he so appears. 66. In view of the aforesaid fact and the plea that the summons itself was without jurisdiction, it was submitted that the threat of coercive action is itself without jurisdiction and a person need not wait for injury to occur before seeking the Court’s protection.37 Mr. Salve emphasised the importance of the observations made in S.M.D. Kiran Pasha v. Government of A.P. and Ors. , where the Court recognized that “if a 35 K.K. Kochunni v. State of Madras, AIR 1959 SC 725, at 729-730; D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab (1971) 2 SCC 261, at para 5; Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap Sudan (2016) 8 SCC 509, at para 42. 36 Tashi Dalek Gaming Solutions Ltd. v. State of Karnataka (2006) 1 SCC 442. 37 Chief of Army Staff v. Major Dharam Pal Kukrety (1985) 2 SCC 412. [73] threatened invasion of a right is removed by restraining the potential violator from taking any steps towards violation, the rights remain protected and the compulsion against its violation is enforced.”38 Mr. Salve further relied on Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Ors., wherein the Court observed “It is, therefore, not reasonable to expect the person served with such an order or notice to ignore it on the ground that it is illegal, for he can only do so at his own risk and peril.”39 The certainty of a legal proposition qua the right of a person was, thus, emphasised by this Court observing “a person placed in such a situation has the right to be told definitely by the proper legal authority exactly where he stands and what he may or may not do.”40 67. The plea raised by Mr. Salve is on the premise that even if a right of privilege validly accrued, the same would have to be narrowly construed and reconciled with the petitioner’s right under Part III of the Constitution . The First and Second Impugned Summons addressed to Petitioner No.1 explicitly stated that it was so addressed to him as the one “spearheading Facebook”, and thus, no option was left to Facebook to 38 (1990) 1 SCC 328, at para 14. 39 (1955) 2 SCR 603 at para 7. 40 Ibid. [74] decide who would appear before the Committee. Of course, with the recall of the Second Impugned Summons and the issuance of the New Summons; this aspect urged before the recall of the first notice would not really survive. 68. Learned counsel, once again, took us to Article 194(3) of the Constitution to contend that it provided that privilege powers would, from time to time, be defined. The submission was that the Constitution makers had envisaged a clear ambit to be defined for privilege powers, which has unfortunately never happened. That is why, the plea has been made to the effect that either this Court defines the privilege power or direct/request the legislature to at least consider the issue of defining these privilege powers on the pari materia basis as in Scotland and Wales. In the context of the language of Article 194(3), it was submitted that only such privileges are available to legislatures that can be exercised without impinging on fundamental rights. 69. In the conspectus of this general proposition, it was urged that the summons issued to the petitioner violated his right to remain silent which was not limited to Article 20 (which was inapplicable by virtue of these [75] not being criminal proceedings); but also implicit in his rights under Article 19(1)(a) and Article 21 of the Constitution. The right of personal autonomy has been held by this Court to include aspects of the choice between speaking and remaining silent.41 70. The summons per se, as per the submissions, were violative of the petitioner’s right against arbitrary State action under Articles 14, 19, and 21 of the Constitution. Learned counsel was conscious of the judgment of this Court in MSM Sharma42 and the view expressed therein about powers, privileges, and immunities available in terms of Articles 105(3) and 194(3) of the Constitution. The Court had taken the view that such powers, privileges, and immunities stood in the same position as Part III of the Constitution and that the fundamental right to free speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) must yield to Article 194. Mr. Salve sought to distinguish this proposition in view of subsequent judicial developments. The principle propounded was submitted to have been eroded by subsequent constitutional developments as per which the right to free speech under Article 19 was to be seen as part of a trilogy of rights 41 Selvi and Ors. v. State of Karnataka (2010) 7 SCC 263; K.S. Puttaswamy and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. (2017) 10 SCC 1; Excel Wear v. Union of India &amp; Ors. (1978) 4 SCC 224. 42 Supra note 14. [76] along with Articles 14 and 21, and the rights no longer existed in silos. It was thus, his contention, that the fundamental proposition that privileges can override Article 19 but not Article 21 stood overruled in view of the judicial pronouncements in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India43 and R.C. Cooper v. Union of India44. It would be relevant to reproduce para 6 of Maneka Gandhi45 as it traces the constitutional development in this regard through various judicial pronouncements as under: “6. We may at this stage consider the interrelation between Article 21 on the one hand and Articles 14 and 19 on the other. We have already pointed out that the view taken by the majority in A.K. Gopalan case [AIR 1950 SC 27 : 1950 SCR 88 : 51 Cri LJ 1383] was that so long as a law of preventive detention satisfies the requirements of Article 22, it would be within the terms of Article 21 and it would not be required to meet the challenge of Article 19. This view proceeded on the assumption that “certain articles in the Constitution exclusively deal with specific matters” and where the requirements of an article dealing with the particular matter in question are satisfied and there is no infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by that article, no recourse can be had to a fundamental right conferred by another article. This doctrine of exclusivity was seriously questioned in R.C. Cooper case [(1970) 2 SCC 298 : (1971) 1 SCR 512] and it was over-ruled by a majority of the full Court, only Ray, J., as he then was, dissenting. The majority Judges held that though a law of preventive detention may pass the test of Article 22, it has yet to satisfy the requirements of other fundamental rights such as Article 19…” 43 (1978) 1 SCC 248. 44 (1970) 2 SCC 298. 45 Supra note 43. [77] 71. We may note in the end an aspect which was raised in the writ petition, but not really contended on behalf of the petitioners: a similar question related to the interplay between the State Legislature’s privilege powers under Article 194(3) and a non-member’s fundamental rights was pending before a 7-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in N. Ravi v. Legislative Assembly46 on account of a perceived conflict between MSM Sharma47 and Special Reference No.1 of 196448. Dr. Singhvi mentioned this issue only to distinguish and state that N. Ravi49 was a case that related to the conviction of a non-member which is not so in the facts of the present case. 72. Dr. Singhvi, on behalf of Respondent No.1, once again, at the threshold submitted that akin to the privileges issue, this issue is also premature as no coercive action has been taken against the petitioner and none was intended if the authorised representative fairly attended and participated in the proceedings as a witness. The transparency of the proceedings was sought to be emphasised as there was a live broadcast 46 (2005) 1 SCC 603. 47 Supra note 14. 48 Supra note 12. 49 Supra note 46. [78] and therefore there could be no question of any apprehension in respect of the proceedings. 73. Learned counsel also sought to assail the maintainability of the writ petition because Petitioner Nos. 2 &amp; 3 are not citizens of India and no shareholder had been impleaded as a petitioner. But then one must note that the initial summons was sent to Petitioner No.1, who is a citizen of India, albeit holding an office in Petitioner No.2 organisation. Subsequently, the summons issued to him was withdrawn and re-worded summons was issued. However, the parties had agreed to proceed on the basis of existing pleadings and questions raised. We are thus, not inclined at the threshold itself to look into this contention with any seriousness. 74. Insofar as the submission about the summons issued to Petitioner No.1 is concerned (even though summons was withdrawn), it was urged that a witness could not claim his right to remain silent or to be let alone in response to a summon to depose before a lawful committee of an empowered legislature. Such a right was not a fundamental right under Article 20 of the Constitution unless a person is an accused; as was the case in Selvi50 which involved rights of an accused in context of narco 50 Supra note 41. [79] analysis and other tests. Petitioner No.1, and for that matter anyone who deposes, is not an accused. There is no conflict between Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and Rule 174 of the Rules. The right to remain silent is relevant only in criminal investigations. The proceedings before the Committee are not criminal or judicial proceedings. There is no accused before the Committee. All persons who appear before it are witnesses and subject to examination by the members as per the Rules of the House. These Rules have been made in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 33 of the GNCTD Act, which in turn draws its strength from Article 239AA(7) of the Constitution. Thus, it was submitted that the mere summons to give expert deposition before the Committee on the issues falling within the remit of the Committee cannot be said to be a violation of any fundamental rights so as to invoke Article 32 of the Constitution. We may note at this stage that the third issue we will deal with is the perceived remit of the Committee and whether the remit has the sanction of the Constitution in the context of division of subject matter under the three Lists of the 7th Schedule. 75. The distinction between members and non-members carved out by Mr. Salve was sought to be brushed aside by Dr. Singhvi by submitting [80] that there was no such distinction as Article 105(4) uses the expression “in relation to persons”. The apprehension about self-incrimination was also urged to be misconceived in view of the constitutional protection envisaged under Article 105(2) of the Constitution. 76. Dr. Singhvi then engaged with the arguments of the petitioners regarding encroachment of fundamental rights, the submissions originally addressed by both parties being in the context of Petitioner No.1. In this regard, it was submitted that not even a prima facie case was established for the breach of any fundamental right. Petitioner No.1 had not been summoned to speak as a private individual but to speak on behalf of Petitioner No.2. Only a shareholder could have asserted the right on behalf of Petitioner Nos. 2 &amp; 3, as they were corporate entities, because individuals’ rights are not to be subsumed in the company.51 77. We may note that surprisingly, Dr. Singhvi sought to urge that Petitioner No.1 has not been summoned to speak as a private individual but to speak for Petitioner No.2. We are saying this is surprising because the New Summons also permits any suitable officer to speak on behalf of 51 Supra note 44; Bennett Coleman &amp; Ors. v. Union of India (1972) 2 SCC 788; Divisional Forest Officer v. Bishwanath Tea Co. Ltd. (1981) 3 SCC 238. [81] Petitioner No. 2 and if a shareholder can urge a right under Article 32 of the Constitution, we fail to appreciate why an officer of a corporation to the extent he has been asked to speak cannot urge this aspect. The First and Second Impugned Summons were specifically addressed to Petitioner No.1 and only during the course of arguments, facing certain difficulties (which somehow Dr. Dhavan did not consider relevant) the initial summons was withdrawn and a new summons issued. 78. The more relevant submission is that in the context of Article 21, at this stage, only a summons to appear was issued and there was no question of restriction of personal liberty. The proceedings were not for breach of privilege. No coercive action was taken or was intended if Petitioner No.1 (or any other officer) merely appeared and assisted the Committee as a witness. On the issue of right to privacy under Article 21, it was urged that Article 21 itself would have to be read as confined to a person while a corporation has no personhood.52 79. The argument of Mr. Salve, based on the trilogy of rights under Articles 14, 19, and 21, was submitted by Dr. Singhvi to be out of context 52 Chiranjit Lal Chowdhury v. Union of India 1950 SCR 869; Petronet LNG Ltd. v. Indian Petronet Group and Anr. (2009) 158 DLT 759. [82] in the present case as the Constitution sets clear parameters for the applicability of certain fundamental rights. Article 19 is still available only to citizens. Article 21 is available only to humans who are capable of having personhood and Article 19(1)(a) continues to be unavailable when legislative privilege is invoked especially if the legislatures are to function effectively. In that context it was urged that the ratio of the decisions in MSM Sharma53 and In Special Reference 1 of 196454 still hold good. On the right to remain silent, it was urged that this was not a right protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution as it was not a general right; and if at all this right had to be pleaded, it was to be before the legislature which had summoned Petitioner No. 1, and not before the Supreme Court. If silence is to be pleaded for a good reason in response to a specific question, that request should be dealt with by the Committee as per applicable rules. Reliance in the petition on the pending reference in N. Ravi55 would be of no avail to the petitioners as there has been no punishment for any breach so far, making the present case distinguishable. 53 Supra note 14. 54 Supra note 12. 55 Supra note 46. [83] 80. Dr. Dhavan while advancing his case on behalf of the Committee sought to lift the corporate veil between Petitioner Nos. 1 &amp; 2, as the true petitioner is Facebook and not Ajit Mohan. The purpose of the summons was to seek Facebook’s assistance regarding its role as a social media platform/intermediary in a situation like the Delhi riot, where persons had deposed before the Committee and pointed out the aggravation which had taken place because of platforms like Facebook. The summons had been issued to Facebook’s senior representative who could be of assistance and the summon itself had made it clear that this notice was issued to Facebook India, not to a specific individual: inasmuch as the notice was issued to Petitioner No.1 in his capacity as a representative of Facebook. Thus, it was contended that neither Article 32 nor Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution were available to the petitioners as these rights do not extend to corporations. This was stated to be of significance as the petitioner had claimed the right against compelled speech under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. As far as corporations are concerned, there are no personal liberties for corporations though they have certain responsibilities.56 56 Supra notes 44 and 51. [84] 81. Learned counsel took us through Article 194(3) to emphasise that it has two parts. The first part deals with privileges being enacted statutorily, while the second part states that until such a law is enacted, legislative privileges are frozen as they stood on 20.06.1979. A trilogy of pre-1979 cases authoritatively discussed which fundamental rights are attracted in relation to a breach of privilege. 57 MSM Sharma58 declared that the relevant portion of the Ganupati Keshavan Reddy59 was obiter and therefore not binding. Thus, it was submitted that the correct legal position regarding privileges and fundamental rights was laid down in MSM Sharma60 and Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 61; i.e., Article 19 of the Constitution does not apply to exercise of privileges under Article 194(3). The relevant portion of the judgment in MSM Sharma62 as part of para 27 is extracted as under: “27. .…Article 19(1)(a) and Art. 194(3) have to be reconciled and the only way of reconciling the same is to read Art. 19(1)(a) as subject to the latter part of Art. 194(3), just as Art. 31 has been read as subject to Art. 265 in the cases of Ramjilal v. Income-tax Officer, Mohindargarh (1) and Laxmanappa Hanumantappa v. 57 Ganupati Keshavan Reddy v. Nafisul Hasan AIR 1954 SC 636 (“the Blitz case”); Supra note 14 (“the Searchlight case”); Supra note 12 (“the Legislative Assembly case”). 58 Supra note 14. 59 Supra note 57. 60 Supra note 14. 61 Supra note 12. 62 Supra note 14. [85] Union of India (2), where this Court has held that Art. 31(1) has to be read as referring to deprivation of property otherwise than by way of taxation. In the light of the foregoing discussion, the observations in the Madhya Bharat case (3) relied on by the petitioner, cannot, with respect, be supported as correct. Our decision in Gunupati Keshavram Reddy v. Nafisul Hasan (4), also relied on by learned advocate for the petitioner, proceeded entirely on a concession of counsel and -cannot be regarded as a considered opinion on the subject. In our judgment the principle of harmonious construction must be adopted and so construed, the provisions of Art. 19(1)(a), which are general, must yield to Art. 194(1) and the latter part of its el. (3) which are special.” 82. Dr. Dhavan in sync with the arguments of Dr. Singhvi disputed Mr. Salve’s case that Articles 14, 19, &amp; 21 of the Constitution were integrated by R. C. Cooper63 and Maneka Gandhi64 into one single right. He submitted that the effect of these cases was only to create India’s due process as far as constitutional limitations are concerned. Each of these rights have their own independent existence and correspondingly their own independent limitations. The golden triangle does not invalidate the cases ruling that Article 194(3) of the Constitution, though subject to Article 21, was not subject to Article 19 of the Constitution. The argument of Mr. Salve was, thus, pleaded to be overstated and contradictory. 63 Supra note 44. 64 Supra note 43. [86] 83. In the end it was contended that no fundamental right was violated by issuance of summons to the petitioner. 84. Suffice to say that so far as learned Solicitor General is concerned no specific arguments were addressed in this behalf except that he drew attention of this Court to N. Ravi65. Legislative Competence 85. Elaborate submissions were addressed on the first three aspects by Mr. Salve even though one of the primary issues was whether it was more speculative in character and premature, as at this stage of the assailed proceedings only summons had been issued to the petitioners. The bedrock of Mr. Salve’s submissions was based on the alleged lack of legislative competence of the Assembly and consequently of the Committee to look into the subject matter qua which the notice had been issued to the petitioners. The submission, thus, was that in the absence of any such legislative competence, the petitioners were entitled to approach the Court at this stage itself rather than being compelled to wait for further progress in the proceedings. 65 Supra note 46. [87] 86. There were three limbs of this submission. The first limb was in respect of the statutory enactments, i.e., the IT Act, enacted by the Parliament under List I, governs and regulates Facebook. This could not be an aspect with which the State Government was concerned. In fact, this was stated to be the reason why the petitioners had willingly cooperated and appeared before the Parliamentary Committee in the past. The second limb was based on the subject matter which the Committee wanted to go into, even though it had been specifically denuded of the power as those subject matters fall within the jurisdiction of the Central Government under Entry 31 (Communications) and under Article 239AA(3)(a) of the Constitution read with Entries 1 and 2 in List II (Public Order and Police). The third limb flowed from these two issues and is based on the unique status of Delhi. He argued that the constitutional scheme specifically took away certain subject matters which would normally fall in List II and would ordinarily be dealt with by a State Assembly. However, in Delhi’s case, these powers were conferred on the Central Government. 87. He then took us through the provisions of the IT Act to contend that it is undisputed that Facebook was an intermediary within the [88] definition of the IT Act. Section 2(1)(w) of the IT Act defines intermediaries as under: “2(1). In this Act, unless the context requires otherwise, xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx [(w) &quot;intermediary&quot;, with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites, online-market places and cyber cafes;]” 88. In the context of the controversy sought to be raised as regards the role of intermediaries during such law and order problems, Mr. Salve contended that this aspect was covered by the power to issue directions to block public access to any information and was thus, squarely covered by Section 69A of the IT Act. 89. The aforesaid provision and its role was not a grey area in view of the judicial pronouncement of this Court in Shreya Singhal v. Union of India.66 Thus, a well-developed procedure to deal with such issues was 66 (2015) 5 SCC 1. [89] already in place and consequently, the matter was an occupied field by the Central Government. 90. Another issue raised by Mr. Salve was that the legislative domains of “public order” and “police” both stood explicitly outside the competence of the Assembly. It was contended that recommendations in matters which fall within List I or which do not fall within List II cannot be said to be legislative functions. It was stressed that the purpose for which the summons was issued, and the issue sought to be addressed by the Committee were aspects of public order and therefore they were not primary functions of the Assembly. 91. The utterances in the press conference were pointed out to contend that it was amply clear that the purpose behind its exercise was to file a supplementary chargesheet which was alien to the powers of the Assembly. 92. The endeavour of Respondent No.1 had been confirmed in the reply filed by the respondents to compel Petitioner No.1 to testify as an expert witness as part of its decision “to delve into the matter of concern raised in the complaints (about Facebook)”. The complaints, in turn, dealt with content allegedly posted on Facebook and how they [90] contributed to the Delhi riots. By respondents’ own pleadings, the endeavour of compelling Petitioner No.1 to appear before it was in furtherance of the following: a. Examine testimonies relating to Facebook’s alleged role in the Delhi riots; b. Examine instances of inaction/inability on the part of social media platform (Facebook) to enforce its policies against hateful content; c. Seek views of Petitioner No.1 as a representative of Facebook to understand Facebook India’s internal policies and their implementation. d. Ascertain (Petitioners’) views on the question whether the said company’s platform has contributed to the Delhi riots and also how these platforms could be used to strengthen unity among the citizens of Delhi in the future. 93. Conscious of the line sought to be adopted by the respondents by referring to “Cooperative Federalism”, Mr. Salve contended that the same was misconceived as it arose in a factual matrix where the Union and the [91] State exercise overlapping powers. The exercise of power by the Assembly in question had no connection with any such area of overlap. He argued that cooperative federalism cannot be converted into an independent head of power in addition to the powers conferred by the statute. In this regard reference was made to two judicial pronouncements in K. Lakshminarayan v. Union of India &amp; Anr. 67 and State (NCT of Delhi) v. Union of India68. 94. In order to appreciate what is meant by “cooperative federalism” in the context of what appears to be a continuous judicial battle between the Central Government and the State Government has been enunciated in State (NCT of Delhi) (2018), where the Court encouraged walking hand- in-hand even if there are different political dispensations in power. We do believe and may note at this stage that such hope has been repeatedly belied! The enunciation of the principle is set out in para 119 as under:69 “119. Thus, the idea behind the concept of collaborative federalism is negotiation and coordination so as to iron out the differences which may arise between the Union and the State Governments in their respective pursuits of development. The Union Government and the State Governments should endeavour to address the common problems with the intention to 67 (2020) 14 SCC 664. 68 Supra note 27. 69 Supra note 27 at para 119. [92] arrive at a solution by showing statesmanship, combined action and sincere cooperation. In collaborative federalism, the Union and the State Governments should express their readiness to achieve the common objective and work together for achieving it. In a functional Constitution, the authorities should exhibit sincere concern to avoid any conflict. This concept has to be borne in mind when both intend to rely on the constitutional provision as the source of authority. We are absolutely unequivocal that both the Centre and the States must work within their spheres and not think of any encroachment. But in the context of exercise of authority within their spheres, there should be perception of mature statesmanship so that the constitutionally bestowed responsibilities are shared by them. Such an approach requires continu