# Rajiv Mohan Mishra vs City And Industrial Development ... on 2 November, 2018
# Source: Indian Kanoon, doc_id=176258557
# Fetch query: Shayara Bano v Union of India 2017 triple talaq

Rajiv Mohan Mishra vs City And Industrial Development ... on 2 November, 2018 Author: A.S.Oka Bench: A.S.Oka, A.K.Menon 1 ssp pil80groupwithospil82 .doc IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION NO.80 OF 2013 ALONG WITH CIVIL APPLICATION NO.54 OF 2016, CIVIL APPLICATION NO.86 OF 2016, CIVIL APPLICATION NO.114 OF 2015, CIVIL APPLICATION NO.134 OF 2015, CIVIL APPLICATION NO.33 OF 2017, CIVIL APPLICATION NO.50 OF 2017 Rajiv Mohan Mishra ...Petitioner vs. City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Ltd. And others ...Respondents. PIL/80/2013 Mr.Aspi Chinoy, Senior Advocate i/b Mr.Datta Mane for the Petitioner Mr.G.S.Hegde i/b G.S.Hegde &amp; Associates for the respondent No.1 Ms Shyamali Gadre i/b Little &amp; Co for the respondent No.2 Mr.Sandeep Marne for the respondent No.3 Mr.Mr.A.Y.Sakhare, Senior Advocate a/w Mr. A. B. Vagyani, GP with Ms Shruti Vyas, AGP `B&#x27; Panel and Mr.Rohan Mirpury for the Respondent Nos.4,5 and 9 Mr.Sanjay Singhavi, Senior Advocate i/b Mr.Rahul Kamerkar for applicant in CAI/33/2017 and CAI/50/2017 Mr.Abhijeet J. Kandarkar for the applicant in CAI/54/2016 ALONG WITH WRIT PETITION NO.4927 OF 2017 Bhausaheb Baban Khedkar &amp; Ors. ...Petitioners vs. Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and others ...Respondents ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 2 ALONG WITH WRIT PETITION NO.7167 OF 2017 Krishna Jotiba Naik ...Petitioner vs. Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and others ...Respondents WP/4927/2018 WITH WP/7167/2017 Mr.Sanjay Singhavi, Senior Advocate i/b Mr.Rahul Kamerkar for the petitioner Ms Shyamali Gadre I/b Little &amp; Co. for the respondent No.1 Mr.Sandeep V. Marne for the respondent No.2 Mr.A.Y.Sakhare, Senior Advocate a/w Mr.A.B.Vagyani, GP a/w Mr.Manish Pabale, AGP a/w Ms Shruti Vyas, AGP `B&#x27; Panel and Mr.Rohan Mirpury for the respondent No.3 WITH PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION NO.138 OF 2012 Mayura Maru ...Petitioner Vs. The State of Maharashtra ...Respondent PIL/138/2012 Mr.Mr.A.Y.Sakhare, Senior Advocate a/w Mr.A.B. Vagyani, GP with Mr.Manish Pabale, AGP with Ms Shruti Vyas, AGP `B&#x27; Panel and Mr.Rohan Mirpury for the respondent No.1 Mr.G.S.Hegde I/b G.S.Hegde &amp; Associates for the respondent No.2 Mr.Sandeep Marne for the respondent No.3 ALONG WITH PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION NO.29 OF 2018 Vivek Velankar ...Petitioner vs. State of Maharashtra &amp; Others ...Respondents ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 3 Mr.A.V.Anturkar, Senior Advocate i/b Mr.Prathamesh B. Bhargude and Mr.Ranjit Shinde and Mr.Ajinkya Udane for the petitioner. Mr.A.Y.Sakhare, Senior Advocate a/w Mr.A.B.Vagyani, GP with Mr.Manish Pabale, AGP a/w Ms Shruti Vyas, AGP `B&#x27; Panel and Mr.Rohan Mirpury for the respondent Nos.1 and 2. ORDINARY ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION NO.82 OF 2017 Janhit Manch ...Petitioner vs. The State of Maharashtra ...Respondent Mr.Jalan Sandeep for the petitioner Mr.A.Y.Sakhare, Senior Counsel a/w Ms Geeta Shastri, Addl.G.P. and Mr.Amit Shastri, for the respondent State. CORAM : A.S.OKA AND A.K.MENON, JJ. DATE ON WHICH JUDGMENT IS RRESERVED: MAY 4, 2018 DATE ON WHICH JUDGMENT IS PRONOUNCED:2nd NOVEMBER,2018 JUDGMENT: (PER A.S.OKA,J.) As can be seen from the administrative order passed by Hon&#x27;ble the Acting Chief Justice on 6th February 2018 (which is on the file of PIL No. 82 of 2017), these matters have been specially assigned to this Bench. 1 One of the issues involved in this group of Public Interest Litigations is of the validity of section 52A of the Maharashtra Regional and Town planning Act, 1966 which provides for en-bloc regularization of a very large number of illegal ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 4 structures constructed in the State on or before 31st December 2015. The issue is whether the concept of town planning will be thrown to winds if the said provision is implemented. The contention is that the very concept of town planning is sought to be destroyed and defeated by enacting section 52A. We are reminded of what Socrates said: &quot;By far the greatest and most admirable form of wisdom is that needed to plan and beautify cities and human communities.&quot; Benjamin Franklin supposedly said once &quot;If you fail to plan, you are planning to fail.&quot; OVERVIEW 2 With a view to reduce the congestion in the city of Mumbai, in early seventies, the twin city of Navi Mumbai was set up by taking recourse to en-bloc acquisition of lands under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,1894 (for short `the Land Acquisition Act&#x27;). The City and Industrial Development of Maharashtra Limited (for short `CIDCO&#x27;), a Government of Maharashtra owned Company was given a status of Special Planning Authority under the provisions of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (for short `the MRTP Act&#x27;). Few years before the development of Navi Mumbai commenced, there was a large scale acquisition of lands in some areas of Navi Mumbai for setting up industrial estates of the Maharashtra Industrial ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 5 Development Corporation (for short &quot;MIDC&quot;) which again is a statutory body created by the State Government under the provisions of the Maharashtra Industrial Development Act,1961 (for short `the MIDC Act&#x27;). It is also a Planning Authority within the meaning of MRTP Act for certain area of Navi Mumbai. Industrial estates were set up on large scale by MIDC and at one stage, industrial belt known as Thane-Belapur Belt which is now a part of Navi Mumbai was known to be one of the largest industrial areas in Asia. 3 PIL Nos.138 of 2012 and 80 of 2013 have been filed for inviting attention of the Court to the large scale illegal constructions which have come up during the last few years in the city of Navi Mumbai(New Bombay). 4 The orders passed in PIL Nos.80 of 2013 and 138 of 2012 and the affidavits on record will show that there are large scale illegal constructions have come up in Navi Mumbai. The illegal constructions are not only of smaller structures or huts but of large multi storied residential buildings. The citizens have been persuaded to purchase flats/premises in the said illegal buildings. As can be seen from some of the orders passed in PIL Nos.80 of 2013 and 138 of 2012, in large number of cases, the persons have acquired flats with the full knowledge that the entire building is illegal. Most of the illegal constructions have come up on the ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 6 lands which were compulsorily acquired by the State Government either for setting up city of Navi Mumbai or for industrial estate of MIDC by paying large amount by way of compensation. Not only that large amount by way of compensation has been paid to those whose lands were acquired for Navi Mumbai Project, but they were allotted developed plots having an area equivalent to 12.5% of the area of the acquired lands. The plots have been allotted at concessional rates. The land mafia has got into action in the city of Navi Mumbai which was once advertised as a &quot;dream city&quot; and has successfully carried out hundreds of illegal constructions. 5 For a part of Navi Mumbai, the Municipal Corporation of city of Navi Mumbai (for short `the said Corporation&#x27;) is the Planning Authority within the meaning of MRTP Act. For certain areas, the CIDCO is the Planning Authority and for the remaining areas, MIDC is the Planning Authority. The orders passed in the aforesaid two PILs will show that the respective areas of jurisdiction of the said three Authorities as Planning Authorities are well defined. There is a clarity on this aspect brought about by the interim orders in these two PILs. 6 These two PILs have been filed to bring to the notice of this Court, the failure of the three Planning Authorities to prevent large scale illegal constructions and their failure to perform its ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 7 statutory duty to remove the illegal constructions. Under the interim orders passed in the aforesaid two petitions, a grievance redress mechanism has been set up which enables the citizens to lodge complaints about the illegal constructions. The three Planning Authorities are expected to take a prompt action against the illegal constructions both by way of prevention and demolition. The affidavits filed on record will show that some of illegal constructions have been demolished on the basis of the interim orders passed by this Court. 7 The orders passed in the aforesaid two PILs will show that on two occasions, the State Government came out with a policy to regularize the illegal constructions on a very large scale and sought leave to implement the policy. This Court rejected the applications made by the State Government on the ground that the policies were arbitrary and discriminatory and were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Ultimately, the State Government came out with a major amendment to the MRTP Act. The said amendment was by the Maharashtra Act No.XXXII of 2017 (for short `the Amendment Act&#x27;). The main feature of the Amendment Act is the introduction of section 52A in the MRTP Act which starts with non obstante clause. The said provision enables the compounding or regularization of unauthorized developments (illegal constructions) carried out in all areas of Development Plan in the State on or before 31 st ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 8 December 2015. Amendment Act introduces definition of compounded structures in the form of sub-section 5-A of section 2. By the said Amendment Act, the provisions of section 53 concerning the power of the Planning Authorities to deal with the unauthorized developments have been made more stringent. For giving effect to the provisions of section 52-A, the Maharashtra Town Planning (Compounded Structures) Rules,2017 (for short `the Compounded Structures Rules&#x27;) have been enacted. By amending the aforesaid two PILs, a challenge has been incorporated to the validity of the Amendment Act and to the Compounded Structure Rules. 8 PIL No.80 of 2013 is filed by the petitioner who is claiming to be a Journalist and RTI activist. He has filed the said PIL inviting attention of the Court to the illegal constructions carried out on the lands described in paragraph 1A situated at village Digha in Navi Mumbai which are vesting in MIDC. It is pointed out that the illegal construction of buildings consisting of four to seven floors is being carried out. Apart from the prayers seeking a writ of mandamus directing demolition of the said buildings, by amending the petition, there is a challenge incorporated to the validity of provisions of the Amendment Act and in particular to section 52A thereof as well as the Compounded Structure Rules. 9 PIL No.138 of 2012 is filed by the petitioner ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 9 who is an Advocate by profession. The subject matter of the said PIL is wider. The subject matter is the issue of builders consuming FSI beyond permissible limits by carrying out illegal constructions in Navi Mumbai. There are prayers made for carrying out survey of illegal constructions and enjoining the CIDCO and the said Municipal Corporation to initiate action against the illegal constructions. 10 PIL No.29 of 2018 has been filed by the petitioner who claims to be a Social Worker and who is running NGO known as Sajag Nagrik Manch. In this petition, there is a challenge to the validity of the provisions of the Amendment Act as well as to the validity of the Compounded Structure Rules. 11 PIL No.82 of 2017 has been filed by Janhit Manch, an organization which has filed several PILs raising diverse issues. The challenge in this PIL is also to the provisions of the Amendment Act and the Compounded Structures Rules. 12 As far as Writ Petition Nos.7167 and 4927 of 2017 are concerned, the same challenge notices of demolition issued presumably on the basis of the directions issued in PIL Nos.138 of 2012 and 80 of 2013. 13 In PIL Nos.80 of 2013 and 138 of 2012, there are directions issued for creating Grievance ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 10 Redressal Mechanism enabling the citizens to complain about the inaction of the Planning Authorities to take action and enjoining the Planning Authorities to take action. There are directions issued to the said Corporation, CIDCO and MIDC to take action of demolition of illegal structures in their capacity as the Planning Authority. At the time of final hearing, apart from one of the intervenors who has challenged the maintainability of the PILs, no one has argued on the necessity of establishing Grievance Redressal Mechanism and the arguments are confined only to maintainability of the PIL Nos.80 and 138 and challenge to the constitutional validity of the Amendment Act and the Compounded Structure Rules. RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS 14 Before we refer to the extensive submissions made before us, we must refer to some of the relevant provisions of the MRTP Act. Sub-sections 5A, 7, 15 and 19 of section 2 read thus: &quot;[(5A) &quot; compounded structure &quot; means an unauthorized structure, in respect of which the compounding charges as levied by the Collector under the provisions of sub-section (2B) of section 18 are paid by the owner or occupier of such structure and which, upon such payment, has been declared as such by the Collector ;] By the Amendment Act, sub-section 5A was substituted by the following provision. ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 11 &quot;(5A) &quot;compounded structure&quot; means any development of land in respect of which the compounding charges, infrastructure charges and premium as levied by the Collector under the provisions of sub- section (2B) of section 18 or by the Planning Authority under section 52A, are paid by the owner or occupier of such structure and which upon such payment has been declared as compounded structure by the Collector or Planning Authority, as the case may be;&quot;. 6... 7&quot;Development&quot; with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of buildings, engineering, mining or other operations in, or over, or under, land or the making of any material change, in any building or land or in the use of any building or land [or any material or structural change in any heritage; building or its precinct] [and includes [demolition of any existing building structure or erection or part of such building, structure of erection; and] [reclamation,] redevelopment and lay-out and sub-division of any land; and &quot;to develop&quot; shall be construed accordingly]; 8... 9... 10... 11... 12... 13... 14... 15 &quot;local authority&quot; means- (a) the `Bombay Municipal Corporation constituted under the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, or the Nagpur Municipal Corporation constituted under the City of Nagpur Municipal Corporation Act,1948, or any Municipal Corporation constituted under the Maharashtra Municipal Corporations Act, (b) a Council and a Nagar Panchyat constituted under the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchyats and Industrial Township Act,1965,] ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 12 (c)(i) A Zilla Parishad constituted under the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act,1961], (ii) the Authority constituted under the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Act,1976], (iii) the Nagpur Improvement Trust constituted under the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act,1936 which is permitted by the State Government for any area under its jurisdiction to exercise the powers of a Planning Authority under this Act. 16... 17... 18... 19 &quot;Planning Authority&quot; means a local authority; and shall include - (a) a Special Planning Authority constituted or appointed or deemed to have been appointed under section 40; (b) in respect of the slum rehabilitation area declared under section 3C of the Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement, Clearance and Redevelopment) Act 1971, the Slum Rehabilitation Authority appointed under section 3A of the said Act.&quot; 15 Sections 52 to 56 and section 142 as they stood before the Amendment Act and after the Amendment Act are relevant which read thus: &quot;52. Penalty for unauthorized development or for use otherwise than in conformity with Development plan - (1) Any person who, whether at his own instance or at the instance of any other person commences, undertakes or carries out development or institutes, or changes the use of any land- (a) without permission required under this Act; or (b) which is not in accordance with any permission granted or in contravention of any condition subject to which such permission has been granted; (c)after the permission for development has been duly revoked; or (d) in contravention of any permission which has been duly modified ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 13 shall, on conviction, [be punished with imprisonment for a term [which shall not be less than one month but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further daily fine which may extend to two hundred rupees] for every day during which the offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the offence. (2) Any person who continues to use or allows the use of any land or building in contravention of the provisions of a Development plan without being allowed to do so under section 45 or 47, or where the continuance of such use has been allowed under that section continues such use after the period for which the use has been allowed or without complying with the terms and conditions under which the continuance of such use is allowed, shall, on conviction be punished [with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees;] and in the case of a continuing offence, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the offence. 53. Power to require removal of unauthorized development - (a) Whether development of land has been carried out as indicated in sub-section(1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may, subject to the provisions of this section, served on the owner a notice requiring him within such period, being not less than one month, as may be specified, therein after the service of the notice, to take such steps as may be specified in the notice, (a) in cases specified in clause (a) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 52, to restore the land to its condition existing before the said development took place. (b) in cases specified in clauses (b) or (d) of sub-section (1) of section 52, to secure compliance with the conditions or with the permission as modified: Provided that, where the notice requires the discontinuance of any use of land, the Planning Authority shall serve a notice on the occupier also. (2) In particular, such notice may, for purposes of sub-section (1) , ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 14 require- (a) the demolition or alteration of any building or works; (b) the carrying out on land of any building or other operations; or (c)the discontinuance of any use of land. (3) Any person aggrieved by such notice may, within the period specified in the notice and in the manner prescribed, apply for permission under section 44 for retention on the land of any building or works or for the continuance of any use of the land, to which the notice relates, and pending the final determination or withdrawal of the application, the mere notice itself shall not affect the retention of buildings or works or the continuance of such use. (4) The foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall, so far as may be applicable apply to an application made under sub-section (2). (5) If the permission applied for is granted, the notice shall stand withdrawn; but if the permission applied for is not granted, the notice shall stand; or if such permission is granted for the retention only of some buildings, or works, or for the continuance of use of only a part of the land, the notice shall stand withdrawn as respects such buildings or works or such part of the land, but shall stand as respects other buildings or works or other part of land, as the case may be and thereupon, the owner shall be required to take steps specified in the notice under sub- section (1) as respects such other buildings, works or part of the land. (6) If within the period specified in the notice or within the same period after the disposal of the application under sub-section (4), the notice or so much of it as stands is not complied with, the Planning Authority may- (a) prosecute the owner for not complying with the notice; and where the notice requires the discontinuance of any use of land any other person also who uses the land or causes or permits the land to be used in contravention of the notice; and (b) where the notice requires the demolition or alteration of any building or works carrying out of any building or other operations, itself cause the restoration of the land to its conditions before the development took place and secure compliance with the conditions of the permission or with the permission as modified by taking such steps as the Planning Authority may consider necessary including demolition or alteration of ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 15 any building or works or carrying out of any building or other operations; and recover the amount of any expenses incurred by it in this behalf from the owner as arrears of land revenue. (7) Any person prosecuted under clause (a) of sub-section (6) shall, on conviction, [be punished with imprisonment for a term [which shall not be less than one month but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further daily fine which may extend to two hundred rupees] for every day during which such offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the offence. (8) The Planning Authority shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate an officer of the Planning Authority to be the Designated Officer for the purposes of exercise of the powers of the Planning Authority under this section and sections 54, 55 and 56. The Designated Officer shall have jurisdiction over such local area as may be specified in the notification and different officers may be designated for different local areas.]&quot; (emphasis added) We must note here that by the Amendment Act, sub-section (1) of section 53 has been substituted by following:- &quot;(1) (a) Where any development of land has been carried out as indicated in clause (a) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may, subject to the provisions of this section, serve on the owner, developer or occupier a prior notice of 24 hours requiring him to restore the land to conditions existing before the said development took place ;(b) if the owner, developer or occupier fails to restore the land accordingly, the Planning Authority shall immediately take steps to demolish such development and seal the machinery and materials used or being used therefor. (1A) Where any development of land has been carried out as indicated in clause (b) or (d) of sub-section (1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may, subject to the provisions of this section, serve one months&#x27; notice on the owner, developer or occupier ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 16 requiring him to take necessary steps as specified in the notice.&quot; (emphasis added) 54. Power to stop unauthorized development - (1) Where any development of land as indicated in sub-section (1) of section 52 is being carried out but has not been completed, the Planning Authority may serve on the owner and the person carrying out the development a notice requiring the development of land to be discontinued from the time of the service of the notice; and thereupon, the provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6) of section 53 shall so far as may be applicable apply in relation to such notice, as they apply in relation to notice under section 53. (2) Any person, who continues to carry out the development of land, whether for himself or on behalf of the owner or any other person, after such notice has been served shall, on conviction [be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both]; and when the compliance is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after the date of the service of the notice during which the non-compliance has continued or continues. 55. Removal or discontinuance of unauthorized temporary development summarily- (1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained in this Chapter, where any person has carried out any development of a temporary nature unauthorizedly as indicated in sub-section (1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may by an order in writing direct that person to remove any structure or work erected, or discontinue the use of land made, unauthorizedly as aforesaid, within fifteen days of the receipt of the order; and if thereafter, the person does not comply with the order within the said period, the Planning Authority may request the District Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police, as the case may be, [or authorize any of its officers or servants,] to have such work summarily removed or such use summarily discontinued without any notice as directed in the order, and any development unauthorizedly made again, ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 17 shall be similarly removed or discontinued summarily without making any order as aforesaid. (2) The decision of the Planning Authority on the question of what is development of a temporary nature shall be final. 56. Power to require removal of authorized development or use.- (1) If it appears to a Planning Authority that it is expedient in the interest of proper planning of its areas (including the interest of amenities) having regard to the Development Plan prepared - (a) that any use of land should be discontinued, or (b) that any conditions should be imposed on the continuance thereof or (c)that any buildings or works should be altered or removed, the Planning Authority may, by notice served on the owner, (i) require the discontinuance of that use; or (ii)impose such conditions as may be specified in the notice on the continuance thereof; or (iii)require such steps, as may be specified in the notice to be taken for the alteration or removal of any buildings or works, as the case may be; within such period, being not less than one month, as may be, specified therein, after the service of the notice. (2) Any person aggrieved by such notice may, within the said period and in the manner prescribed, appeal to the State Government. (3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the State Government or any other person appointed by it in this behalf may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the appellant and the Planning Authority, dismiss the appeal or allow the appeal by quashing or varying the notice as it may think fit. (4) If any person - (i) who has suffered damage in consequence of the compliance with the notice by the depreciation of any interest in the land to which he is entitled or by being disturbed in his enjoyment of the land or otherwise; or (ii) who has carried out any works in compliance with the notice, claims from the Planning Authority, within the time and in the manner, prescribe compensation in respect of that damage, or of any expenses reasonably ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 18 incurred by him, for complying with the notice, then the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 51 shall apply in relation to such claim as those provisions apply to claims for compensation under those provisions. (5) If any person having interest in land in respect of which a notice is issued under this section claims that by the reason of the compliance with the notice, the land will become incapable of reasonably beneficial use, he may within the period specified in the notice or within such period after the disposal of the appeal, if any, filed under sub-section (2) and in the manner prescribed, serve on the State Government a purchase notice requiring his interest in the land to be acquired; and thereupon, the provisions of section 49 for dealing with a purchase notice shall, so far as can be made applicable, apply as they apply to a purchase notice under that section. 142. Sanction of prosecution - No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act or rules made thereunder shall be instituted or no prosecution instituted shall be withdrawn except with the previous sanction of the Regional Board, Planning Authority, or as the case may be, a Development Authority or any officer authorized by such Board or Authorized in this behalf.&quot; We must note here that a proviso has been added to section 142 by the Amendment Act which reads thus: &quot;Provided that, no sanction shall be necessary where unauthorized development has been carried out on the plot having area more than 1000 square meters.&quot; (emphasis added) 16 For the sake of convenience, we are reproducing Amendment Act which reads thus: &quot;1. This Act may be called the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act,2017. 2 In section 2 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 19 Act,1966 (hereafter referred to as &quot;the principal Act&quot;), for clause (5A), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- &quot;(5A) &quot;compounded structure&quot; means any development of land in respect of which the compounding charges, infrastructure charges and premium as levied by the Collector under the provisions of sub-section (2B) of section 18 or by the Planning Authority under section 52A, are paid by the owner or occupier of such structure and which upon such payment has been declared as compounded structure by the Collector or Planning Authority, as the case may be,&quot; 3. In section 18 of principal Act, in sub-section (2B), after the words &quot;compounding charges&quot; the words &quot;infrastructure charges and premium&quot; shall be inserted. 4. After section 52 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- &quot;52A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law, for the time being in force, or in any judgment, order or direction of any Court where unauthorized development has been carried out on or before the 31st December 2015, in the area of Development Plan, the State Government may, upon the request of the Planning Authority, specify the terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the rules made in this behalf, on compliance of which and the compounding charges, infrastructure charges and premium on payment of which, the Planning Authority may declare such development as compounded structure. (2) On declaration of such development as compounded structure under sub-section (1), no further proceedings under any law for the time being in force against the owner or occupier of such structure shall be taken or continued: Provided that, no further development shall be permissible in any compounded structure, other than repairs and maintenance, and any ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 20 development or reconstruction of such structure shall be only as per the provisions of the prevailing Development Control Regulations.&quot; 5. In section 53 of the Principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely :- &quot;(1) (a) Where any development of land has been carried out as indicated in clause (a) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may, subject to the provisions of this section, serve on the owner, developer or occupier a prior notice of 24 hours requiring him to restore the land to conditions existing before the said development took place; (b) if the owner, developer or occupier fails to restore the land accordingly, the Planning Authority shall immediately take steps to demolish such development and seal the machinery and materials used or being used therefor. (1A) Where any development of land has been carried out as indicated in clause (b) or (d) of sub-section (1) of section 52, the Planning Authority may, subject to the provisions of this section, serve one month&#x27;s notice on the owner, developer or occupier requiring him to take necessary steps as specified in the notice.&quot; 6. In section 142 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- &quot;Provided that, no sanction shall be necessary where unauthorized development has been carried out on the plot having area more than 1000 square meters.&quot; (emphasis added) 17 The provisions of the Compounded Structure Rules read thus: &quot;1. These rules may be called the Maharashtra Town Planning (Compounded Structures) Rules, 2017. 2. These rules shall apply to the unauthorized developments carried out on or before 31/12/2015 within the jurisdiction of Local/Planning Authority area. 3. In these rules,unless the context requires otherwise,- ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 21 (a) &quot;Act&quot; means the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (Mah.XXXVII of 1966); (b) &quot;Buffer zone&quot; means an area to be left free from development as per the concerned regulations; (c) &quot;Compounded structure&quot; means a structure defined as compounded structure under clause (5A) of section 2 of the Act; (d) &quot;Compounding charges&quot;, &quot;infrastructure charges&quot; and &quot;premium&quot; means compounding charges, infrastructure charges and premium as specified by the Government under these rules; (e) &quot;Prohibited areas&quot; means the areas where development is prohibited on account of safety and legal or natural impediments or constraints; (f) &quot;Regulations&quot; means Development Control and Promotion Regulations made under the Act; (g) &quot;Structurally unsafe buildings&quot; means the building which is declared as dangerous structure under the relevant provisions of the concerned Municipal laws time being in force; (h) &quot;Unauthorized development&quot; means an unauthorized development as envisaged in subsection (1) of Section 52 of the Act; The words an expression used in these Rules but not defined hereinabove shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them under the Act, rules or regulations made thereunder. 4.The following types of unauthorized developments shall not be considered for declaration as compounded structure under section 52(A) of the Act, namely:- (a) Unauthorized developments in the areas where development is prohibited by or under the law, such as rivers, canals, tanks, blue flood line, defence zone, quarry, heritage buildings, dumping grounds, ecologically sensitive areas like hill slope having slope greater than 1:5, CRZ-I areas, mangroves, forest etc.; (b) Unauthorized development in Buffer Zones. (c) Structurally unsafe building; ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 22 (d) Unauthorized development on lands in zones other than the Residential Zone, Public-Semipublic Zone, Commercial Zone &amp; Industrial Zone. (e) Unauthorized development carried out by violating the land use permissible in zones of Development Plan except in the Residential Zone. 5. The following types of unauthorized developments may be considered for declaration as compounded structure subject to the fulfillment of conditions mentioned below and parameters specified in the table annexed to these rules. (a) Unauthorized development on imam lands and class-II Occupant lands on production of clearance or No Objection Certificate from the competent authority. (b) Unauthorized developments on lands reserved for public purposes except play ground, garden and open spaces in any plan, if the said reservation is shifted or deleted after following due process of law, subject to the condition that the cost of shifting or deletion is born by the owner and / or occupier. (c) Unauthorized developments on lands reserved for linear reservations such as roads, railways, metros in any plan if the said linear reservations are shifted after following due process of law. (d) Unauthorized developments on buildable reservations in any plan, if requirements of regulation for Accommodation Reservation are complied with. (e) Unauthorized developments violating the land use zone,if the land use zone is changed after following due process of law subject to the condition that the cost of zone change is born by the owner and / or occupier. (f) Unauthorized developments on Government lands or lands owned by other public authorities on production of, - (i) No objection certificate from the land owning authority authorized to do so under the law applicable thereto;and (ii)After transfer or allotment or lease of such land to the concerned person by following due process of law under the law applicable thereto. (g) Unauthorized developments on unauthorized plots subject to conditions mentioned in entry 14 in the table annexed hereto; 6.Development which is permissible in Residential or Commercial or Public- ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:31 ::: 23 semipublic or Industrial Zone as per prevailing development control Regulations but constructed without obtaining prior permissions of the authority shall be considered for declaration as compounded structure by charging compounding charges. 7.Unauthorized developments which is carried out in Residential or Commercial or Public-semipublic or Industrial Zone in violation of Regulations for the following grounds may be considered for declaration as compounded structure after taking into consideration the parameters specified in the table annexed to these rules. (i) Floor Space Index (F.S.I.) (ii) Height of building (iii) Marginal open spaces. (iv) Coverage. (v)Road width or (vi) Other development control matters provided in the table annexed to these rules. 8. Every Planning Authority shall,within six months from the commencement of these rules, publish notice,in local newspapers widely circulated in its area, inviting applications, in the form provided by it in the public notice, from the owners or occupiers of unauthorized development, for consideration to declare such structure as compounded structure and stating therein the time and date on or before which the application must reach to it and applications received thereafter shall not be considered; 9. Every Planning Authority shall consider the applications received by it after taking into consideration the parameters specified in these rules and in the table annexed to these rules; 10. Where the Planning Authority is satisfied in case or class of cases the unauthorized developments or use of such developments can be permitted for retention or continuation of use by charging and recovering premium, infrastructure charges and compounding charges, as specified in these rules and upon such payments, the Planning Authority may declare such unauthorized development as compounded structure; ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 24 11. Where the planning authority has declared any unauthorized development as compounded structure, no further development shall be permissible in such structure other than repairs and maintenance, and any redevelopment or reconstruction of such structure shall be permissible only as per the provisions of the prevailing Development Control and Promotion Regulations; 12.In respect of unauthorized development to be declared as compounded structure, in addition to the Development Charges,- (a)i)Infrastructure charges equal to the development charges shall be levied and recovered. ii) Compounding charges not less than double the development charges shall be levied and recovered. (b) Premium shall be assessed, levied and recovered as applicable in the jurisdiction of planning authorities for the categories such as Addition Floor Space Index premium, Transferable Development Rights (TDR) loading premium, infrastructure improvement charges, Deficiency premium etc. as the case may be. 13. All money received by the planning authority as a premium, infrastructure charges and compounding charges under these rules shall be credited to a separate head of account and the same shall be utilized only for the purpose for providing public amenities, utilities and services in the respective areas.&quot; &quot;By order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra&quot; ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 25 Table Parameters to be taken into consideration by the Planning Authority while declaring unauthorized developments as compounded structures 1 Permissible height of building Road Maximum with respect to Road Width. width permissible height 6.00 mt. Upto 15.00 mt. 9.00 mt. Upto 24.00 mt. 12.00 mt. Upto 36 mt. 2 Permissible building use. Mixed uses under R-1 and R-2 zones may be considered as permissible in Development Control Regulations without the limitations of the floors. Uses in independent building may be considered as permissible in Development Control Regulations, provided the road width is minimum 9 mt. Mixed use other than residential use may be considered by charging compounding charges as specified in these rules. 3 Permissible Floor Space Provided that if some extra Index (FSI) construction has been carried out beyond the then permissible Floor Space Index limit or areas free of Floor Space Index have been brought into habitable use, then such areas / construction can be considered for declaration as compounded structure by procuring premium Floor Space Index or Fungible Floor Space Index or Transferable Development Right admissible as per the current norms in the prevailing Development Control Regulation by paying additional compounding charges at the rate of 10% of land rate ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 26 as mentioned in the Annual Statement Rates in addition to the premium for such additional Floor Space Index; Explanation:- For the purpose of this clause higher permissible Floor Space Index as applicable for Economically Weaker Section / Low Income Group housing and slum rehabilitation projects shall be taken into consideration subject to the restrictions of dwelling unit sizes mentioned in the respective Development Control Regulations. 4 Inadequate set backs Inadequate marginal distances with respect to Development Control Regulations may be considered as per the following table:- Sr. Building Minimum No height required setback 1 Height up 0.75 mtr. to 10 mtr. 2 10 to 24 50 % of required mtr. setback 3 Above 24 50 % of required mtr. setback or as decided by Chief Fire Officer. It can be considered for compounding subject to recovery of an amount equal to 50 % of the cost of the unauthorized development occupied by inadequate marginal distance calculated as per the construction rate mentioned in applicable Annual Statement of Rates, with additional compounding charges equal to 10 % of the land rate in current Annual Statement of Rates subject to No ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 27 Objection Certificate of fire, wherever necessary. 5 Width of approach road Width of approach road must be as per the approved Development Control Regulations of the concerned planning authority. If width of approach road is not as per the Development Control Regulations, the possibility of widening the same may be explored by adopting the process under prevailing Acts / Rules / Regulations. However, in any case, following minimum width of road should be observed. In Gaothan Area - i) For purely Residential use - at least 4.50 m. ii) For Mixed use - at least 6.00 m. In Outside Gaothan Area - i) For purely Residential use - at least 6.00 m. ii) For Mixed use - at least 9.00 m. However such uses may be considered by charging the additional compounding charges equal to 10 percent of the land rate in current Annual Statement of Rates. 6 Plinth area (Ground Coverage) Plinth area or Ground Coverage may be relaxed by the concerned planning authority or officer authorized by charging the additional compounding charges equal to 10% of the land rate in current Annual Statement Rates. These charges shall not be necessary in cases in which charges for inadequate setback are recovered. 7 Parking area If parking area is not possible to be provided for the individual building, possibility be explored to provide mechanical parking or a space for common parking adjoining such area. If ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 28 not possible then concession be given by charging additional premium equal to 20% of land rate in current Annual Statement of Rates. 8 Stair case width / passage Relaxation may be granted up to 30 % of width / balcony / terrace / the base Floor Space Index as per the misuse of any free Floor Development Control Regulations by Space Index component. recovering additional compounding charges equal to 10 % of the land rate in current Annual Statement of Rates. 9 No Objection Certificates No Objection Certificate from authorized of Drainage Department officer of Planning Authority is required wherever necessary. 10 No Objection Certificates No Objection Certificate from authorized of Water Supply Department officer of Planning Authority is required wherever necessary. 11 No Objection Certificates No Objection Certificate from authorized of Garden officer of Planning Authority is required wherever necessary. 12 No Objection Certificates of Wherever required as per the Fire department Development Control Regulations, fire No Objection Certificate from authorized officer is necessary. 13 Structural stability of Wherever required as per the Unauthorized building Development Control Regulations, Structural stability certificate / No Objection Certificate from authorized structural engineer is necessary. 14 Unauthorized sub-division Unauthorized layouts which are as per of layouts / plot in Residential the Development Control Regulations Zone can be regularized by charging one time compounding charges as specified by the Government. But when such layouts are not as per the Development Control Regulations, then in such cases compounding charges plus land value of compulsory re-recreational open space shall be recovered. for unauthorized sub- ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 29 division of plot, when such plot owner comes for regularization then such plot may be regularized by charging compounding and infrastructure charges. iii) In cases (i) and (ii) above where open spaces are not available in layouts, in such cases Floor Space Index shall be the75 per cent of the basic Floor Space Index. By order and in the name of Governor of Maharashtra, SUBMISSIONS 18 The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner in PIL No.80 of 2013 has made detailed submissions. The first submission is that permitting/regularizing the constructions is contrary to the town planning laws and the Development Plan under the MRTP Act. It violates the rights of the citizens guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In support of the submissions, he has has placed reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of Virendra Gaur vs. State of Haryana1, M.C.Mehta vs. Union of India and others2, Dr.Mahesh Bedekar vs. State of Maharashtra3, Janhit Manch and another vs. State of Maharashtra and others4, Dipak K. Mukherjee vs. Kolkatta Municipal Corporation5, Consumer Action Group vs. State of Tamil Nadu and others 6. He 1 (1995) 2 SCC 577 2 2004 (6) SCC 588 3 2016 SCC Online 8894 (Bom) 4 2006 SCC Online 1145 (Bom) 5 (2013) 5 SCC 336 6 AIR 2000 SC 3060 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 30 pointed out that Article 21 of the Constitution of India encompasses within its ambit protection and preservation of environmental and ecological balance. Right to reside in a pollution free atmosphere is also a part of it. He submitted that if open lands vested in Local Authorities which are meant for public amenity to the residents of the locality are allowed to be constructed upon, it will adversely affect the health and environment and it will affect ecology. He submitted that en- bloc regularization of illegal structures will put an extra load on existing infrastructure which will be violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. His submission is that there is no material placed on record to show the impact of regularization of such large number of illegal constructions across the State on the environment, ecology and infrastructure. He urged that the regularization of such large number of structures cannot be countenanced if the same is going to violate the rights of the citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that the planned development of cities is also a facet of right to life as held by this Court in the case of P.G.Gupta vs. State of Gujrat and others7. He urged that the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India includes living in a clean environment with proper infrastructural needs. He submitted that the rights of the citizens cannot be defeated on the pretext of 7 1995 Supp (2) SCC 182 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 31 protecting those who continue to occupy public lands. He also pointed out the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Consumer Action Group Vs. State of Tamil Nadu (supra). He pointed out that though the challenge to section 113 of the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act which provided for regularization of large number of structures failed, the Apex Court has considered only the arguments based on violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India on the ground of absence of guidelines and on the ground that the provisions conferred unbridled power. He pointed out that the Apex Court confirmed the decision of the Madras High Court in the case of Consumer Action Group (supra) by which an amendment Act extending cut off date for regularization under section 113A of the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act was struck down by the High Court on the ground of violation of the rights under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India. 19 The learned senior counsel relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Deena @ Deen Dayal and others vs. Union of India and others8 and submitted that when it is demonstrated that a particular enactment violates the rights under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, heavy burden lies on the State to justify by placing a cogent material and evidence that the legislation is necessary and it is just, fair and reasonable. 8 1983 (4) SCC 645 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 32 He relied upon various paragraphs of the said decision. He submitted that Article 21 refers to not only procedural due process but also to substantive due process as Articles 14 and 19 will have to read with Article 21. He relied upon the recent decision of the Apex Court in the case of K.S.Puttaswamy Vs. Union of India9. 20 He made a submission that section 52-A as well as the Compounded Structure Rules are arbitrary, unreasonable and unfair. For that purpose, he has taken us through the various provisions of the said Rules. He pointed out that the State Government has not relied upon any material or survey report which deals with the impact of such large scale regularization of the illegal structures. 21 His submission is that the wholesale regularization of such large number of structures on the lands reserved for railways, roads, Metro, public purposes except gardens and buildable reservation on Government lands will have a direct impact on the existing infrastructural facilities, public amenities and the life of lawful residents. He submitted that no such study has been made by the State Government before enacting the Amendment Act. He would urge that difficulties which may be faced in demolition of the illegal structures and providing housing is no ground to defeat the fundamental rights of the citizens under Article 21 9 (2017) 10 SCC 1 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 33 of the Constitution of India. 22 In support of PIL No.80 of 2013, submissions are the same. In support of PIL No.29 of 2018, the learned senior counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Amendment Act and the Compounded Structure Rules are violative of Article 14 on the ground that there is no object sought to be achieved. He submitted that the object, if any, has to be a constitutionally permissible object and that there has to be a rational nexus to any object sought to be achieved. He urged that section 52-A of the Amendment Act does not lay down any guidelines for Planning Authorities and the State Government to whom legislature has delegated power to regularize the structures and in absence of guidelines, impugned Amendment Acts and the Compounded Structure Rules, suffer from excessive delegation. He pointed out that the statement of objects of the Amendment Act. He pointed out that only rationale is to overreach the decisions of this Court by which permission to implement policy of regularization was refused. He submitted that by a legislation, the basis of the judicial pronouncement can be taken away. However,in this case, without taking away the basis of the judicial decisions, a legislation is sought to be made only with a view to overruling the judicial pronouncement. ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 34 23 He urged that the impugned Amendment Act is arbitrary and it is well settled that arbitrariness is a ground to challenge a legislation. The learned senior counsel relied upon the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of E.P.Royappa vs. State of Tamil Nadu10. He also relied upon another decision of the Apex Court in the case of Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India 11. He submitted that the observations made in paragraph 62 of the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Rajbala and others Vs. State of Haryana and others12 do not support the argument that any proposition contrary to the earlier decisions in the case of E.P.Royappa (supra) and Maneka Gandhi (supra) has been laid down. He submitted that the Amendment Act introduces discrimination which is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that a power is conferred on the State Government to permit regularization of the structures within the jurisdiction of different Planning Authorities by imposing different terms and conditions. He submitted that the said provision discriminates between the persons who can afford to make payment of infrastructural charges, compounding charges and premium and those who are not in a position to pay the said amounts. He submitted that neither in the statement of objects and reasons nor in the affidavit in reply filed by the State Government, it is stated that 10 (1974) 4 SCC 3 11 (1978) 1 SCC 248 12 (2016) 2 SCC 445 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 35 any detailed survey was conducted by the State Government. He submitted that some of the Rules show that the legislature has even given a total go-by to the reservations under the Development Plans thereby sacrificing the interests of general public. Relying upon section 53A(2), he submitted that in case of an elected councilor who carries out illegal construction, if the illegal construction is compounded, even proceedings for disqualification cannot be initiated. He submitted that in absence of guidelines given to the Planning Authorities and the State Government to whom power to regularize has been delegated, the provisions of the Amendment Act become vulnerable. He placed reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Kishan Prakash Sharma and others Vs. Union of India and others13. He also submitted that even the provisions of the Compounded Structure Rules become vulnerable. The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner in PIL No.82 of 2017 are similar to those of the other petitions. 24 The learned counsel for the applicant in Civil Application Nos.33 and 50 of 2017 in PIL No.80 of 2013 (petitioners in Writ Petition Nos.4927 of 2017 and 7167 of 2017) opposed the petitions. He submitted that the power of the Courts in India of judicial review are limited to due procedure under Article 21 of the Constitution of India and substantive due process cannot be invoked. He 13 (2001) 5 SCC 212 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 36 submitted that only ground on which a provision of law enacted by a competent legislature can be struck down is that it is violative of some provisions of the Constitution. He submitted that properly enacted law cannot be struck down as being arbitrary. He submitted that a law which gives any judicial power to executive can also be struck down as being arbitrary as it does not comply with the rationale of law or of the purpose for which such executive power is granted. He submitted that there is no challenge in the PILs to the provisions of the Amendment Act and the Compounded Structure Rules on the ground of lack of legislative competence. He invited our attention to the objects of MRTP Act which are reflected from its preamble. He submitted that the main object of the MRTP Act is planned development and use of the land. He submitted that the plans envisaged by the MRTP Act are required to be prepared after taking into consideration the existing condition of the lands from time to time. He submitted that necessarily the plans prepared under the MRTP Act have to provide for regularization of the structures which may be already existing on the lands unless the Planning Authority keeping in view the object of making a plan or scheme under the MRTP Act in a proper manner prefers to demolish the illegal structures. He submitted that the object of MRTP Act is not only to demolish illegally built structures but to plan &quot;Developments and use of land&quot; to ensure that the ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 37 town planning schemes are made in a proper manner and their execution is effectively made. He submitted that in given circumstances, planning can be best made by providing for regularization of certain structures built illegally. He submitted that if for tackling the issue of large scale illegal constructions, the State Government can provide for regularizing the same, it will be perfectly within the four corners of the MRTP Act. Therefore, the legislature in its wisdom can fix a cut off date and provide that structures illegally erected before the said cut off date could be regularized. He submitted that if such provision is made by amending the MRTP Act, the same would be perfectly legal. He submitted that in a given case, it is not necessary to fix the cut off date. He relied upon a decision of Gujarat High Court in the case of Shivlal K. Purohit and others Vs. State of Gujarat14. He invited our attention to section 113A and 113C of Tamil Nadu enactment dealing with the town planning. He submitted that by amendment, cut off dates for tolerating illegal structures were changed from time to time. He submitted that such amendments were held to be legal. In this behalf, he relied upon the decision of Madras High Court in the case of K.R.Ramaswamy alias Traffic Ramaswamy Vs. State of Tamil Nadu15. He submitted that Karnataka High Court upheld the similar amendments on a particular cut off date made by the 14 2012 SCC OnLine Guj 5059 15 2014 (1) L.W.657 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 38 legislature of Karnataka. 25 Dealing with the argument of discrimination, he submitted that discrimination per se does not violate Article 14 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that the question is whether categories created are intelligible and separate and whether creation of categories has nexus with the object sought to be achieved. He submitted that in case of impugned Amendment Act, the object sought to be achieved is planned development and use of lands. He urged that the object is to ensure that various plans under the MRTP Act are effectively implemented and executed. He submitted that that is the reason why there is a provision made for payment of Compounding charges, Infrastructure charges etc. He submitted that the provisions relating to the said charges have direct a nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the Amendment Act. He submitted that merely because an argument is made that only the rich people may be able to pay the Compounding charges as well as Infrastructure charges and poor people may not able to pay the same is not sufficient to uphold the contention regarding violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that the amendment cannot become discriminatory because different Planning Authorities are entitled to have different norms for Compounding of illegal structures. He submitted that different areas have different plans having different Development ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 39 Control Regulations. That is the reason why each area can have separate norms. 26 He submitted that as far as India is concerned, the substantive due process of law cannot be read into Article 21 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that the right claimed by the PIL petitioners to clean environment and better conditions of life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India has to be weighed against the right to have a shelter available to the citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. He submitted that both the rights which are available under Article 21 of the Constitution of India can be curtailed to the extent considered necessary by the competent legislature. He urged that the substantive due process of law as urged by the petitioners cannot be applied. He submitted that the argument that the Amendment Act has been enacted to overrule the Judgments of this Court is completely erroneous. He pointed out that on two occasions, the State Government came out with a policy for regularization and this Court held that the policy was illegal on the ground that it is not consistent with the law. He submitted that now, the legislature has amended the MRTP Act by the Amendment Act which is perfectly permissible. He relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Bakhtawar Trust and others vs. M.D.Narayan and others16. He submitted that the said decision 16 (2003) 5 SCC 298 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 40 accepts the proposition that such a law could be framed by a competent legislature. He submitted that there is no properly constituted challenge to the Compounded Structure Rules. He submitted that if an occasion arises, the applicants reserve their right of challenging the Compounded Structure Rules. He made submissions on anomaly created by the use of words &quot;twenty four hours&quot; which were introduced by the Amended Act in clause (a) of sub- section 1 of section 53 of the MRTP Act. He submitted that clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section 1 of section 53 will have to be harmoniously construed. Anomaly can be removed by reading down clause (a) of sub-section 1 of section 53 by striking down the words &quot;twenty four hours&quot;. 27 The learned senior counsel for the State and the learned Government Pleader by relying upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Chameli Singh and others Vs. State of U.P. and another 17 urged that the right of human being to shelter was held to be a basic human right. It is an essential requisite of the right to live. They relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Ahmednagar Municipal Corporation vs. Nawab Khan Gulab Khan and others18 wherein it is held that the State has a Constitutional duty to provide adequate facilities by distributing its wealth and resources for erection of shelter for the citizens to make their life meaningful, effective and fruitful. 17 (1996) 2 SCC 549 18 (1997) 11 SCC 121 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 41 Reliance was placed upon other two decisions of the Apex Court in the cases of P.G.Gupta vs. State of Gujrat and others (supra) and U.P.Avas Evam Vikas Parishad and another vs. Friends Co-operative Housing Society Limited and another19, in support of the proposition that the right to shelter is a fundamental right guaranteed to citizens which springs from right to residence under Article 19(1) (e) and Right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 28 It is submitted that the State Government took a note of large scale illegal structures in the entire State. It is submitted that the State Government felt that it is impossible to demolish a huge number of illegal constructions which would render a huge number of occupants and other flat purchasers homeless and without shelter. He submitted that the State does not possess adequate lands, and therefore, the State will not able to bear the burden of providing shelter to all the occupants. He submitted that the State cannot ignore its constitutional obligation to provide shelter to the citizens and to protect their lives. It is submitted (and it is specifically recorded in the written submissions filed by the State) that the legislature has enacted section 52-A as one time measure which permits compounding of certain illegal structures within the permissible limits and guidelines provided under the Compounded 19 1995 Supp (3) SCC 456 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 42 Structure Rules. 29 The learned Government Pleader submitted that there is always a presumption in favour of the legality of a statute. He submitted that the Amendment Act does not provide en-bloc for regularization of the illegal structures erected up to 31st December 2015 and in fact, parameters have been specifically laid down in the Compounded Structure Rules as to which illegal structures can be regularized. He submitted that ultimately, the legislature has to make an endeavour to strike the balance between the object of planned development under the MRTP Act and the protection right to shelter which is guaranteed to the citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 30 Relying upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of State of Bihar vs. Bihar Distillery20, he urged that while deciding the issue of constitutional validity of an enactment, the Court has to start with the presumption of Constitutionality. He submitted that it is the duty of the Court to sustain the validity of legislation to the extent possible and the Court can strike down the statute only when it is impossible to sustain the same. He submitted that no statute could be declared as void unless it&#x27;s unconstitutionality is plainly and clearly established. He relied upon the observations of 20 (1997) 2 SCC 453 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 43 the Apex Court laying down the approach of the Court in such matters. He also relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Mark Netto vs. State of Kerala21. He submitted that the Court will have to presume that the legislature understands and appreciates the needs of the people and the laws it enacts are with the object of solving the problems. He submitted that the elected representatives who assemble in the legislature have collective experience. He relied upon another decision of the Apex Court in the case of B.R.Enterprises vs. State of U.P 22. He urged that the law is well settled. Mere possibility of abuse of law is not at all a ground to hold it to be unconstitutional. He relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Sushil Kumar vs. Union of India23. He submitted that the validity of a statute can be challenged only on two well recognized grounds, (i) absence of the competence of the legislature and (ii) clear violation of the provisions of the Constitution. He urged that a statute cannot be struck down on the ground of arbitrariness. He relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Government of A.P vs. P. Lakshmi Devi24 as well as another decision in the case of Rajbala and others vs. State of Haryana and others (supra). 31 He also relied upon well known decision of the 21 (1979) 1 SCC 23 22 (1999) 9 SCC 700 23 (2005) 6 SCC 281 24 (2008) 4 SCC 720 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 44 Apex Court in the case of Welfare Association A.R.P. Maharashtra and another vs. Ranjit P. Gohil25 and submitted that the burden is on the petitioners to prove transgression of the constitutional principles. 32 He submitted that the legislature has taken a note of the large number of the illegal constructions which have come up in the State and the fact that the large number of citizens will be affected by demolition of the illegal constructions. He reiterated that as one time measure, the legislature has come out with section 52-A. He submitted that such one time measure has been approved by the Apex Court in the case of Consumer Action Group and another vs. State of Tamil Nadu and others. He also criticized the argument based on arbitrariness of the cut off date. He submitted that there is nothing capricious and whimsical about such cut off date. He relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of D.S.Nakara and others vs. Union of India26. 33 He submitted that the challenge to section 52-A on the basis of the alleged violation of Article 14 cannot be sustained and the argument that the unbridled and unfettered power is conferred to regularize the structures has no basis in view of the Compounded Structure Rules. 25 (2003) 9 SCC 358 26 (1983) 1 SCC 305 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 45 He submitted that the reliance placed on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Deena @ Deen Dayal and others (supra) is misplaced as it was the case where the challenge was to the method of imposing death penalty. In that context, the Apex Court shifted the burden on the State to show that the action was in terms of the procedure established by law. 34 He submitted that the Compounded Structure Rules provide for detailed guidelines as to in what manner the power under section 52-A can be exercised. He urged that the said Rules provide for several cases in which illegal structures can be declared as compounded structures. 35 The learned Government Pleader lastly relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Bombay Dyeing &amp; Manufacturing Co. Limited (3) vs. Bombay Environmental Action Group and others27. He pointed out that the Apex Court categorically held that the requirement of entire population of Mumbai from environmental aspect cannot be a factor to be taken into consideration for interpretation of a statute. He submitted that the statute has to be considered as a legislative thought and it cannot be looked with a coloured glass. In the context of a challenge based on violation of rights under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, he submitted that the 27 (2006) 3 SCC 434 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 46 Compounded Structure Rules specifically provide that the structures in eco-sensitive areas, mangroves areas, river banks, CRZ areas cannot be declared as Compounded Structures and hence, cannot be regularized. He submitted the Compounded Structure Rules itself show that the legislature has made every possible effort to ensure that regularization of illegal structures does not affect the environment. He would, therefore, submit that section 52A and the Compounded Structure Rules are not ultra virus and the challenge to the same must failed. 36 The learned counsel for the MIDC and the CIDCO have submitted that their stand cannot be contrary to the stand of the State Government. The stand of the said Corporation appears to be the same. 37 Shri Nedumpara, the learned counsel appearing for one of the Intervenors urged that these PILs are not maintainable as there is no public interest involved. He submitted that admittedly a number of citizens will be affected by the orders which may be passed in the PILs and none of them are the parties to the petitions. He pointed out that these two PILs ought not to have been entertained. He urged that by no stretch of imagination, it can be said that the petitioners are pro-bono litigants. He submitted that the amendment under challenge is itself made ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 47 in public interest. 38 He submitted that a Public Interest Litigation can be entertained only for the benefit of the poor and downtrodden who by reason of poverty or otherwise are unable to approach the Court of law. He urged that the petitioners in these PILs do not fall in the said category. He submitted that the petitioners cannot seek a direction for demolition of large number of structures without impleading the persons who will be directly affected as the party respondents. 39 We have carefully considered the submissions. We have carefully examined all the decisions relied upon by the parties. CONSIDERATION OF THE AFORESAID PRELIMINARY OBJECTION 40 The Apex Court in the case of Avishek Goenka (2) v. Union of India28 held thus: 13. The judgment dated 27-4-2012 [Avishek Goenka (1) v. Union of India, (2012) 5 SCC 321 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 712] was passed in a public interest litigation and the orders passed by this Court would be operative in rem. It was neither expected of the Court nor is it the requirement of law that the Court should have issued notice to every shopkeeper selling the films, every distributor distributing the films and every manufacturer manufacturing the films. But, in any case, this was a widely covered matter by the Press. It was incumbent upon the applicants to approach the Court, if 28 (2012) 8 SCC 44 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 48 they wanted to be heard at that stage. The writ petition was instituted on 6-5-2011 and the judgment in the case was pronounced after hearing all concerned, including the Union Government, on 27-4-2012 [Avishek Goenka (1) v. Union of India, (2012) 5 SCC 321 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 712] , nearly after a year. Hence, this ground raised by the applicants requires noticing only for being rejected. (emphasis added) 41 In the present case, the record will show that number of affected persons have been heard. Mr.Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel has made very detailed submissions on behalf of the persons for whose benefit the Amendment Act has been enacted. The record will show that large number of affected persons are aware of the proceedings. Wide publicity was given in media about the pendency of the issues in these matters. The law laid down as above will squarely apply. Therefore, we reject the argument of Shri Nedumpara. No one has seriously challenged the locus of the Petitioners as pro- bono litigants by placing any material on record. The issues involved in these PILs affect fundamental rights of large number of citizens. The issues affect the future of the planning in the cities in the State. Hence, the objection to maintainability of PILs stands rejected. The interim directions issued by this Court direct the Planning Authorities to demolish the illegal structures only after following due process of law. The directions ensure that no illegal structure is demolished without giving an ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 49 opportunity of being heard as provided in law. SCOPE OF CHALLENGE TO STATUTORY PROVISIONS ON THE BASIS OF VIOLATION OF ARTICLES 14 AND 21 42 It is well settled that there is always a presumption that a statute is valid. It is not necessary to reproduce the large number of decisions relied upon in that behalf. As far as the scope of challenge to constitutional validity of a legislation is concerned, in the case of Binoy Viswam vs Union of India29, in paragraph 76, the Apex Court held that &quot;Scope of judicial review of the legislative Act&quot; 76. Under the Constitution, Supreme Court as well as High Courts are vested with the power of judicial review of not only administrative acts of the executive but legislative enactments passed by the legislature as well. This power is given to the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution and to the Supreme Court under Article 32 as well as Article 136 of the Constitution. At the same time, the parameters on which the power of judicial review of administrative act is to be undertaken are different from the parameters on which validity of legislative enactment is to be examined. No doubt, in exercises of its power of judicial review of legislative action, the Supreme Court, or for that matter, the High Courts can declare law passed by Parliament or the State Legislature as invalid. However, the power to strike down primary legislation enacted by the Union or the State Legislatures is on limited grounds. Courts can strike down legislation either on the basis that it falls foul of federal distribution of powers or that it contravenes fundamental rights or other constitutional rights/provisions of the Constitution of India. No doubt, since the Supreme Court and the High Courts are treated as the ultimate arbiter in all matters involving interpretation of the Constitution, it is the courts which have the final say on questions relating to rights and whether such a right is violated or not. The basis of the aforesaid statement lies in Article 13(2) of the Constitution which proscribes the State from making &quot;any law which takes away or abridges the right conferred by Part III&quot;, enshrining fundamental rights. It categorically states that 29 (2017) 7 SCC 59 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 50 any law made in contravention thereof, to the extent of the contravention, be void. 77. We can also take note of Article 372 of the Constitution at this stage which applies to pre-constitutional laws. Article 372(1) reads as under: &quot;372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.--(1) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Constitution of the enactments referred to in Article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, all the laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority.&quot; In the context of judicial review of legislation, this provision gives an indication that all laws enforced prior to the commencement of the Constitution can be tested for compliance with the provisions of the Constitution by courts. Such a power is recognized by this Court in Union of India v. Sicom Ltd. [Union of India v. Sicom Ltd., (2009) 2 SCC 121] In that judgment, it was also held that since the term &quot;laws&quot;, as per Article 372, includes common law the power of judicial review of legislation, which is a part of common law applicable in India before the Constitution came into force, would continue to vest in the Indian courts. 78. With this, we advert to the discussion on the grounds of judicial review that are available to adjudge the validity of a piece of legislation passed by the legislature. We have already mentioned that a particular law or a provision contained in a statute can be invalidated on two grounds, namely: (i) it is not within the competence of the legislature which passed the law, and/or (ii) it is in contravention of any of the fundamental rights stipulated in Part III of the Constitution or any other right/provision of the Constitution. Ultimately, in paragraph 83, the Apex Court held thus: 83. It is, thus, clear that in exercise of power of judicial review, the Indian courts are invested with powers to strike down primary legislation enacted by Parliament or the State Legislatures. However, while undertaking this exercise of judicial review, the same is to be done at three levels. In the first stage, the Court would examine as to whether impugned provision in a legislation is compatible with the fundamental rights or the constitutional provisions (substantive judicial review) or it falls foul of the federal distribution of powers (procedural judicial review). If it is not found to be so, no further exercise is needed as ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 51 challenge would fail. On the other hand, if it is found that legislature lacks competence as the subject legislated was not within the powers assigned in the List in Schedule VII, no further enquiry is needed and such a law is to be declared as ultra vires the Constitution. However, while undertaking substantive judicial review, if it is found that the impugned provision appears to be violative of fundamental rights or other constitutional rights, the Court reaches the second stage of review. At this second phase of enquiry, the Court is supposed to undertake the exercise as to whether the impugned provision can still be saved by reading it down so as to bring it in conformity with the constitutional provisions. If that is not achievable then the enquiry enters the third stage. If the offending portion of the statute is severable, it is severed and the Court strikes down the impugned provision declaring the same as unconstitutional. (emphasis added) Another decision on this aspect is the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Deena @ Deen Dayal and Others vs. Union of India and others (supra). By the said decision, the Apex Court held that it is permissible to challenge the validity of a statute on the ground of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The Apex Court also dealt with the issue of burden of proof as regards the challenge based on Articles 14, 19 as well as 21 of the Constitution. In paragraph 17 of the said decision, the Apex Court held thus: &quot;17 Thus, there is a fundamental distinction between cases ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 52 arising under Article 14 and those which arise under Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. In a challenge based on the violation of Articles 19 and 21, the petitioner has undoubtedly to plead that, for example, his right to free speech and expression is violated or that he is deprived of his right to life and personal liberty. But once he shows that which really is not a part of the &quot;burden of proof&quot;, it is for the State to justify the impugned law or action by proving that, for example, the deprivation of the petitioner&#x27;s right to free speech and expression is saved by clause (2) of Article 19 since it is in the nature of a reasonable restriction on that right in the interests of matters mentioned in clause (2), or that, the petitioner has been deprived of his life or personal liberty according to a just, fair and reasonable procedure established by law. In cases arising under Article 19, the burden is never on the petitioner to prove that the restriction is not reasonable or that the restriction is not in the interests of matters mentioned in clause (2). Likewise, in cases arising under Article 21, the burden is never on the petitioner to prove that the procedure prescribed by law which deprives him of his life or personal liberty is unjust, unfair or unreasonable. That is why the ratio of cases which fall under the category of the decision in Ram Krishna Dalmia must be restricted to those arising under Article 14 and cannot be extended to cases arising under Article 19 of Article 21 of the Constitution.&quot; (emphasis added) 43 In paragraph 22, of the same decision, the Apex Court held thus: ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 53 &quot;22 Another decision in the same category of cases is Mohd. Faruk V. State of Madhya Pradesh, in which the State Government issued a notification cancelling the confirmation of the municipal bye-laws in so far as they related to the permission to the slaughtering of bulls and bullocks. Dealing with the challenge of the petitioner to the notification on the ground that it infringed his fundamental right under Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution Shah,J., who spoke for the Constitution Bench observed: (SCC pp.856-57,para8) When the validity of a law placing restriction upon the exercise of fundamental rights in Article 19(1) is challenged, the onus of proving to the satisfaction of the Court that the restriction is reasonable lies upon the State.... Imposition of restriction on the exercise of a fundamental right may be in the form of control or prohibition, but when the exercise of a fundamental right is prohibited, the burden of proving that a total ban on the exercise of the right alone may ensure the maintenance of the general public interest lies heavily upon the State. When, in a matter arising under Article 21, the person aggrieved is found to have been totally deprived of his personal liberty or is being deprived of his right to life, the burden of proving that the procedure established by law for such deprivation is just, fair and reasonable lies heavily upon the State.&quot; (emphasis added) 44 Another decision of the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court which is very material on the aspect ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:32 ::: 54 is in the case of K.S.Puttaswamy Vs. Union of India (supra). The Apex Court was dealing with the right of privacy which is guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. The majority view which is reflected from the erudite exposition by Dr D.Y. Chandrachud, J. (On behalf of Khehar, C.J., Agrawal, J., himself and Nazeer, J.) reads thus: &quot;291. Having noticed this, the evolution of Article 21, since the decision in Cooper [Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 248] indicates two major areas of change. First, the fundamental rights are no longer regarded as isolated silos or watertight compartments. In consequence, Article 14 has been held to animate the content of Article 21. Second, the expression &quot;procedure established by law&quot; in Article 21 does not connote a formalistic requirement of a mere presence of procedure in enacted law. That expression has been held to signify the content of the procedure and its quality which must be fair, just and reasonable. The mere fact that the law provides for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is not sufficient to conclude its validity and the procedure to be constitutionally valid must be fair, just and reasonable. The quality of reasonableness does not attach only to the content of the procedure which the law prescribes with reference to Article 21 but to the content of the law itself. In other words, the requirement of Article 21 is not fulfilled only by the enactment of fair and reasonable procedure under the law and a law which does so may yet be susceptible to challenge on the ground that its content does not accord with the requirements of a valid law. The law is open to substantive challenge on the ground that it violates the fundamental right. ......................... 294. The Court, in the exercise of its power of judicial review, is unquestionably vested with the constitutional power to adjudicate upon the validity of a law. When the validity of a law is questioned on the ground that it violates a guarantee contained in Article 21, the scope of the challenge is not confined only to whether the procedure for the deprivation of life or personal liberty is fair, just and reasonable. Substantive challenges to the validity of laws encroaching upon the right to life or personal liberty has been considered and dealt with in varying contexts, such as the death penalty (Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] ) and mandatory death sentence (Mithu [Mithu v. State of Punjab, (1983) 2 SCC 277 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] ), among other cases. A person cannot be deprived of life or personal liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law. Article 14, as a guarantee against arbitrariness, infuses the entirety of Article 21. The interrelationship between the guarantee against arbitrariness and the protection of life and personal liberty operates in a multi-faceted plane. First, it ensures that the procedure ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 55 for deprivation must be fair, just and reasonable. Second, Article 14 impacts both the procedure and the expression &quot;law&quot;. A law within the meaning of Article 21 must be consistent with the norms of fairness which originate in Article 14. As a matter of principle, once Article 14 has a connect with Article 21, norms of fairness and reasonableness would apply not only to the procedure but to the law as well. 295. Above all, it must be recognized that judicial review is a powerful guarantee against legislative encroachments on life and personal liberty. To cede this right would dilute the importance of the protection granted to life and personal liberty by the Constitution. Hence, while judicial review in constitutional challenges to the validity of legislation is exercised with a conscious regard for the presumption of constitutionality and for the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial institutions, the constitutional power which is vested in the Court must be retained as a vibrant means of protecting the lives and freedoms of individuals. 296. The danger of construing this as an exercise of &quot;substantive due process&quot; is that it results in the incorporation of a concept from the American Constitution which was consciously not accepted when the Constitution was framed. Moreover, even in the country of its origin, substantive due process has led to vagaries of judicial interpretation. Particularly having regard to the constitutional history surrounding the deletion of that phrase in our Constitution, it would be inappropriate to equate the jurisdiction of a constitutional court in India to entertain a substantive challenge to the validity of a law with the exercise of substantive due process under the US Constitution. Reference to substantive due process in some of the judgments is essentially a reference to a substantive challenge to the validity of a law on the ground that its substantive (as distinct from procedural) provisions violate the Constitution. (emphasis added) 45 The controversy whether a legislation can be challenged on the ground of violation of Article 14 is now laid to rest by a recent decision of the five Judge Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Shayara Bano v. Union of India30. Rohinton Fali Nariman,J. speaking for himself and on behalf of Lalit,J., held thus: &quot;67. We now come to the development of the doctrine of arbitrariness and its application to State action as a distinct doctrine on which State action may be struck down as being violative of the rule of law contained in Article 14. In a significant passage, Bhagwati, 30 (2017) 9 SCC 1 ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 56 J., in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N. [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&amp;S) 165] stated: (SCC p. 38, para 85) &quot;85. The last two grounds of challenge may be taken up together for consideration. Though we have formulated the third ground of challenge as a distinct and separate ground, it is really in substance and effect merely an aspect of the second ground based on violation of Articles 14 and 16. Article 16 embodies the fundamental guarantee that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State. Though enacted as a distinct and independent fundamental right because of its great importance as a principle ensuring equality of opportunity in public employment which is so vital to the building up of the new classless egalitarian society envisaged in the Constitution, Article 16 is only an instance of the application of the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14. In other words, Article 14 is the genus while Article 16 is a species. Article 16 gives effect to the doctrine of equality in all matters relating to public employment. The basic principle which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalizing principle? It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J., &quot;a way of life&quot;, and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be &quot;cribbed, cabined and confined&quot; within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it effects any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment. They require that State action must be based on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant considerations because that would be denial of equality. Where the operative reason for State action, as distinguished from motive inducing from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area of permissible considerations, it would amount to mala fide exercise of power and that is hit by Articles 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of power and arbitrariness are different lethal radiations emanating from the same vice: in fact the latter comprehends the former. Both are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16.&quot; 68. This was further fleshed out in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] , where, after stating that various fundamental rights must be read together and must overlap and fertilise each other, Bhagwati, J., further amplified this doctrine as follows: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7) ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 57 &quot;The nature and requirement of the procedure under Article 21 7. Now, the question immediately arises as to what is the requirement of Article 14: what is the content and reach of the great equalising principle enunciated in this article? There can be no doubt that it is a founding faith of the Constitution. It is indeed the pillar on which rests securely the foundation of our democratic republic. And, therefore, it must not be subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic approach. No attempt should be made to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and doctrinaire limits. We must reiterate here what was pointed out by the majority in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N. [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&amp;S) 165] , namely, that: (SCC p. 38, para 85) &#x27;85. ... From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14....&#x27; Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence and the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be &quot;right and just and fair&quot; and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive; otherwise, it would be no procedure at all and the requirement of Article 21 would not be satisfied.&quot; 70. That the arbitrariness doctrine contained in Article 14 would apply to negate legislation, subordinate legislation and executive action is clear from a celebrated passage in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1981 SCC (L&amp;S) 258] : (SCC pp. 740-41, para 16) &quot;16. ... The true scope and ambit of Article 14 has been the subject-matter of numerous decisions and it is not necessary to make any detailed reference to them. It is sufficient to state that the content and reach of Article 14 must not be confused with the doctrine of classification. Unfortunately, in the early stages of the evolution of our constitutional law, Article 14 came to be identified with the doctrine of classification because the view taken was that that article forbids discrimination and there would be no discrimination where the classification making the differentia fulfils two conditions, namely, (i) that the classification is founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group; and (ii) that that differentia has a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the impugned legislative or executive action. It was for the first ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 58 time in E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N. [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&amp;S) 165] that this Court laid bare a new dimension of Article 14 and pointed out that that article has highly activist magnitude and it embodies a guarantee against arbitrariness. This Court speaking through one of us (Bhagwati, J.) said: (SCC p. 38, para 85) &#x27;85. ... The basic principle which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is equality and inhibition against discrimination. Now, what is the content and reach of this great equalising principle? It is a founding faith, to use the words of Bose, J., &quot;a way of life&quot;, and it must not be subjected to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be &quot;cribbed, cabined and confined&quot; within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it effects any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment.&#x27; This vital and dynamic aspect which was till then lying latent and submerged in the few simple but pregnant words of Article 14 was explored and brought to light in Royappa case [E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N., (1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&amp;S) 165] and it was reaffirmed and elaborated by this Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] where this Court again speaking through one of us (Bhagwati, J.) observed: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7) &#x27;7. Now the question immediately arises as to what is the requirement of Article 14: what is the content and reach of the great equalising principle enunciated in this article? There can be no doubt that it is a founding faith of the Constitution. It is indeed the pillar on which rests securely the foundation of our democratic republic. And, therefore, it must not be subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic approach. No attempt should be made to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and doctrinaire limits. ... Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non- arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence....&#x27; ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 59 This was again reiterated by this Court in International Airport Authority case [Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC 489 : (1979) 3 SCR 1014] , SCR at p. 1042 (SCC p. 511) of the Report. It must therefore now be taken to be well settled that what Article 14 strikes at is arbitrariness because any action that is arbitrary, must necessarily involve negation of equality. The doctrine of classification which is evolved by the courts is not paraphrase of Article 14 nor is it the objective and end of that article. It is merely a judicial formula for determining whether the legislative or executive action in question is arbitrary and therefore constituting denial of equality. If the classification is not reasonable and does not satisfy the two conditions referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality under Article 14 would be breached. Wherever therefore there is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the executive or of an &quot;authority&quot; under Article 12, Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such State action. In fact, the concept of reasonableness and non- arbitrariness pervades the entire constitutional scheme and is a golden thread which runs through the whole of the fabric of the Constitution.&quot; 72. Close upon the heels of this judgment, a discordant note was struck in State of A.P. v. McDowell &amp; Co. [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] Another three-Judge Bench, in repelling an argument based on the arbitrariness facet of Article 14, held: (SCC pp. 737-39, para 43) &quot;43. Shri Rohinton Nariman submitted that inasmuch as a large number of persons falling within the exempted categories are allowed to consume intoxicating liquors in the State of Andhra Pradesh, the total prohibition of manufacture and production of these liquors is &quot;arbitrary&quot; and the amending Act is liable to be struck down on this ground alone. Support for this proposition is sought from a judgment of this Court in State of T.N. v. Ananthi Ammal [State of T.N. v. Ananthi Ammal, (1995) 1 SCC 519] . Before, however, we refer to the holding in the said decision, it would be appropriate to remind ourselves of certain basic propositions in this behalf. In the United Kingdom, Parliament is supreme. There are no limitations upon the power of Parliament. No court in the United Kingdom can strike down an Act made by Parliament on any ground. As against this, the United States of America has a Federal Constitution where the power of the Congress and the State Legislatures to make laws is limited in two ways viz. the division of legislative powers between the States and the Federal Government and the fundamental rights (Bill of Rights) incorporated in the Constitution. In India, the position is similar to the United States of America. The power of Parliament or for that matter, the State Legislatures is restricted in two ways. A law made by Parliament or the legislature can be struck down by courts on two grounds and two grounds alone viz. (1) lack of legislative competence, and (2) violation of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or of any other constitutional provision. There is no third ground. We do not wish to enter into a discussion of the ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 60 concepts of procedural unreasonableness and substantive unreasonableness--concepts inspired by the decisions of the United States Supreme Court. Even in USA, these concepts and in particular the concept of substantive due process have proved to be of unending controversy, the latest thinking tending towards a severe curtailment of this ground (substantive due process). The main criticism against the ground of substantive due process being that it seeks to set up the courts as arbiters of the wisdom of the legislature in enacting the particular piece of legislation. It is enough for us to say that by whatever name it is characterised, the ground of invalidation must fall within the four corners of the two grounds mentioned above. In other words, say, if an enactment is challenged as violative of Article 14, it can be struck down only if it is found that it is violative of the equality clause/equal protection clause enshrined therein. Similarly, if an enactment is challenged as violative of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Article 19(1), it can be struck down only if it is found not saved by any of clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 and so on. No enactment can be struck down by just saying that it is arbitrary [ An expression used widely and rather indiscriminately--an expression of inherently imprecise import. The extensive use of this expression in India reminds one of what Frankfurter, J. said in Hattie Mae Tiller v. Atlantic Coast Line Railroad Co., 87 L Ed 610 : 318 US 54 (1943), &quot;A phrase begins life as a literary expression; its felicity leads to its lazy repetition and repetition soon establishes it as a legal formula, undiscriminatingly used to express different and sometimes contradictory ideas&quot;, said the learned Judge.] or unreasonable. Some or other constitutional infirmity has to be found before invalidating an Act. An enactment cannot be struck down on the ground that court thinks it unjustified. Parliament and the legislatures, composed as they are of the representatives of the people, are supposed to know and be aware of the needs of the people and what is good and bad for them. The court cannot sit in judgment over their wisdom. In this connection, it should be remembered that even in the case of administrative action, the scope of judicial review is limited to three grounds viz. (i) unreasonableness, which can more appropriately be called irrationality, (ii) illegality and (iii) procedural impropriety (see Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Civil Service [Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Civil Service, 1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3 WLR 1174 : (1984) 3 All ER 935 (HL)] which decision has been accepted by this Court as well). The applicability of doctrine of proportionality even in administrative law sphere is yet a debatable issue. (See the opinions of Lords Lowry and Ackner in R. v. Secy. of State for Home Deptt., ex p Brind [R. v. Secy. of State for Home Deptt., ex p Brind, 1991 AC 696 : (1991) 2 WLR 588 : (1991) 1 All ER 720 (HL)] , AC at pp. 766-67 and 762.) It would be rather odd if an enactment were to be struck down by applying the said principle when its applicability even in administrative law sphere is not fully and finally settled. It is one thing to say that a restriction imposed upon a fundamental right can be struck down if it is disproportionate, excessive or unreasonable and quite another ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 61 thing to say that the court can strike down enactment if it thinks it unreasonable, unnecessary or unwarranted.&quot;This extract is taken from Shayara Bano v. Union of India, (2017) 9 SCC 1 : 2017 SCC On Line SC 963 at page 82 73. This judgment in McDowell &amp; Co. case [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] failed to notice at least two binding precedents, first, the judgment of a Constitution Bench in Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1981 SCC (L&amp;S) 258] and second, the judgment of a coordinate three-Judge Bench in Lakshmanan [K.R. Lakshmanan v. State of T.N., (1996) 2 SCC 226] . Apart from this, the reasoning contained as to why arbitrariness cannot be used to strike down legislation as opposed to both executive action and subordinate legislation was as follows. 74. According to the Bench in McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] , substantive due process is not something accepted by either the American courts or our courts and, therefore, this being a reiteration of substantive due process being read into Article 14 cannot be applied. A Constitution Bench in Mohd. Arif v. Supreme Court of India [Mohd. Arif v. Supreme Court of India, (2014) 9 SCC 737 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 408] has held, following the celebrated Maneka Gandhi [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] , as follows: (Mohd. Arif case [Mohd. Arif v. Supreme Court of India, (2014) 9 SCC 737 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 408] , SCC pp. 755-56, para 27-28) &quot;27. The stage was now set for the judgment in Maneka Gandhi [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] . Several judgments were delivered, and the upshot of all of them was that Article 21 was to be read along with other fundamental rights, and so read not only has the procedure established by law to be just, fair and reasonable, but also the law itself has to be reasonable as Articles 14 and 19 have now to be read into Article 21. [See at SCR pp. 646-48 : SCC pp. 393-95, paras 198-204 per Beg, C.J., at SCR pp. 669, 671-74 &amp; 687 : SCC pp. 279-84 &amp; 296-97, paras 5-7 &amp; 18 per Bhagwati, J. and at SCR pp. 720-23 : SCC pp. 335-39, paras 74-85 per Krishna Iyer, J.]. Krishna Iyer, J. set out the new doctrine with remarkable clarity thus: (SCR p. 723: SCC pp. 338-39, para 85) &#x27;85. To sum up, &quot;procedure&quot; in Article 21 means fair, not formal procedure. &quot;Law&quot; is reasonable law, not any enacted piece. As Article 22 specifically spells out the procedural safeguards for preventive and punitive detention, a law providing for such detentions should conform to Article 22. It has been rightly pointed out that for other rights forming part of personal liberty, the procedural safeguards enshrined in Article 21 are available. Otherwise, as the procedural safeguards contained in Article 22 will be available only in cases of preventive and punitive detention, the right to life, more fundamental than any other forming part of personal liberty and paramount to the ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 62 happiness, dignity and worth of the individual, will not be entitled to any procedural safeguard save such as a legislature&#x27;s mood chooses.&#x27; 28. Close on the heels of Maneka Gandhi case [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] came Mithu v. State of Punjab [Mithu v. State of Punjab, (1983) 2 SCC 277 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] , in which case the Court noted as follows: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 6) &#x27;6. ... In Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn. [Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] while dealing with the question as to whether a person awaiting death sentence can be kept in solitary confinement, Krishna Iyer, J. said that though our Constitution did not have a &quot;due process&quot; clause as in the American Constitution; the same consequence ensued after the decisions in Bank Nationalization case [Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 248] and Maneka Gandhi case [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] .... In Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580] which upheld the constitutional validity of the death penalty, Sarkaria J., speaking for the majority, said that if Article 21 is understood in accordance with the interpretation put upon it in Maneka Gandhi [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] , it will read to say that: (SCC p. 730, para 136) &quot;136. &#x27;No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to fair, just and reasonable procedure established by valid law.&#x27; &quot; &#x27; The wheel has turned full circle. Substantive due process is now to be applied to the fundamental right to life and liberty.&quot; 75. Clearly, therefore, the three-Judge Bench in McDowell case [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] has not noticed Maneka Gandhi [Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, (1978) 1 SCC 248] cited in Mohd. Arif [Mohd. Arif v. Supreme Court of India, (2014) 9 SCC 737 : (2014) 5 SCC (Cri) 408] to show that the wheel has turned full circle and substantive due process is part of Article 21 as it is to be read with Articles 14 and 19. 82. It is, therefore, clear from a reading of even the aforesaid two Constitution Bench judgments in Mithu case [Mithu v. State of Punjab, (1983) 2 SCC 277 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] and Sunil Batra case [Sunil Batra v. Delhi Admn., (1978) 4 SCC 494 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 155] that Article 14 has been referred to in the context of the constitutional invalidity of statutory law to show that such statutory law will be struck down if it is found to be &quot;arbitrary&quot;. 83. However, the three-Judge Bench in McDowell [State of ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 63 A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] dealt with the binding Constitution Bench decision in Mithu [Mithu v. State of Punjab, (1983) 2 SCC 277 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] as follows: (McDowell case [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] , SCC p. 739, para 45) &quot;45. Reference was then made by Shri G. Ramaswamy to the decision in Mithu v. State of Punjab [Mithu v. State of Punjab, (1983) 2 SCC 277 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 405] wherein Section 303 of the Indian Penal Code was struck down. But that decision turned mainly on Article 21 though Article 14 is also referred to along with Article 21. Not only did the offending provision exclude any scope for application of judicial discretion, it also deprived the accused of the procedural safeguards contained in Sections 235(2) and 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code. The ratio of the said decision is thus of no assistance to the petitioners herein.&quot; A binding judgment of five learned Judges of this Court cannot be said to be of &quot;no assistance&quot; by stating that the decision turned mainly on Article 21, though Article 14 was also referred to. It is clear that the ratio of the said Constitution Bench was based both on Article 14 and Article 21 as is clear from the judgment of the four learned Judges in paras 19 and 23 set out supra. [ It is clear that one judgment can have more than one ratio decidendi. This was recognised early on by the Privy Council in an appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales, in Commissioners of Taxation for the State of New South Wales v. Palmer, 1907 AC 179 (PC). Lord Macnaghten put it thus: (AC p. 184)&quot;... But it is impossible to treat a proposition which the court declares to be a distinct and sufficient ground for its decision as a mere dictum, simply because there is also another ground stated upon which, standing alone, the case might have been determined.&quot;In Jacobs v. London County Council, 1950 AC 361 : (1950) 1 All ER 737, the House of Lords, after referring to some earlier decisions held, as follows: (AC p. 369 : All ER p. 741)&quot;... However, this may be, there is, in my opinion, no justification for regarding as obiter dictum a reason given by a Judge for his decision, because he has given another reason also. If it were a proper test to ask whether the decision would have been the same apart from the proposition alleged to be obiter, then a case which ex facie decided two things would decide nothing. A good illustration will be found in London Jewellers Ltd. v. Attenborough, (1934) 2 KB 206 (CA). In that case the determination of one of the issues depended on how far the Court of Appeal was bound by its previous decision in Folkes v. R., (1923) 1 KB 282 (CA), [in which] the court had given two grounds for its decision, the second of which [as stated by Greer, L.J., in Attenborough case, (1934) 2 KB 206] was that: (KB p. 222)&#x27;... where a man obtains possession with authority to sell, or to become the owner himself, and then sells, he cannot be treated as having obtained the goods by larceny by a trick.&#x27; &quot;In Attenborough case, (1934) 2 KB 206 it was contended ::: Uploaded on - 03/11/2018 ::: Downloaded on - 04/11/2018 01:30:33 ::: 64 that, since there was another reason given for the decision in Folkes case, (1923) 1 KB 282, the second reason was obiter, but Greer, L.J., said in reference to the argument of counsel: (Attenborough case, KB p. 222)&quot;I cannot help feeling that if we were unhampered by authority there is much to be said for this proposition which commended itself to Swift, J., and which commended itself to me in Folkes v. R., (1923) 1 KB 282, but that view is not open to us in view of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Folkes v. R., (1923) 1 KB 282. In that case two reasons were given by all the members (footnote 65 contd.)of the Court of Appeal for their decision and we are not entitled to pick out the first reason as the ratio decidendi and neglect the second, or to pick out the second reason as the ratio decidendi and neglect 